
dan quayle is likely to be a ``man on the outside'' in george bush's white house following a vice presidential candidacy that began in a furor but settled into obscurity, experts say.
encumbered by his image as a political novice who needed a bevy of professional handlers to survive early campaign controversies, quayle enters a bush administration in which he has few intimates or allies.
relegated in the campaign to small towns and safe gop areas, quayle as vice president is likely to be given a traditional ceremonial role _ going to political gatherings and state funerals _ rather than the advisory role that walter mondale and even bush had, some scholars feel.
``dan quayle is going to set the vice presidency back about a decade or more. one thing that political scientists have been talking about is just how much the vice presidency has grown. ... with quayle, it's just going to retreat to the old days of politics and funerals,'' said ryan barilleaux, a professor of political science at miami university in oxford, ohio, who studies the american presidency.
bush rarely mentioned his 41-year-old running mate during the campaign. when asked, bush employed the stock lines that quayle would ``make an outstanding vice president'' and had been ``tempered by steel'' as he weathered the early furor over his military service, academic record and personal life.
the president-elect told reporters quayle would have access to the same papers, information and intelligence that is available to the president. but he would go no further in describing what assignments he would give quayle.
quayle says bush has talked to him about heading a space council, and that he assumes he'll have a role in the administration's anti-drug efforts. ``i will be a very close adviser to the president,'' quayle said.
but that's not the way everyone sees it.
both bush and mondale came to their vice presidential campaigns with substantial reputations and were able to place key staffers in important positions in the respective presidential campaigns, barilleaux notes.
``dan quayle has contributed nothing in the way of staff to the bush campaign. he doesn't have his own big reputation on capitol hill. ... dan quayle has no friends in a bush white house except george bush,'' barilleaux says.
``they're going to give him a lot of window dressing, a space council, drug task force, but he's going to be a man on the outside ... not a man who's going to be consulted in a crisis, except on a pro forma basis.''
but eddie mahe jr., a gop consultant who worked with the bush campaign, says bush is likely to give quayle a more active role in the administration than he had in the campaign.
``vindication demands that. both of them will want to prove how right the decision was,'' mahe says.
democrats portrayed quayle during the campaign as a lightweight, a man with little or no legislative accomplishments, untested and unqualified to be a heartbeat away from the presidency. even some members of quayle's own party were dismayed at bush's choice.
quayle didn't help his case by making a number of celebrated gaffes during the campaign, perhaps the worst being his garbled explanation of the holocaust and his declaration, ``i didn't live in this century.''
norman ornstein, of the american enterprise institute, says quayle, while ``not the world's leading intellectual,'' is not ``a complete dummy.'' he was simply thrust into a situation for which he was unprepared, ornstein says.
``i think he's immature. he's not stupid,'' ornstein says.
but quayle comes to the white house with ``a very damaging stereotype that's developed about him that's widely believed in the political community and that's believed by a large segment of the electorate,'' ornstein says.
``that's going to give him a good deal to overcome. it's going to give him an enormous impetus to prove himself. that's going to be difficult, given the office.''
both barilleaux and stephen hess of the brookings institution see parallels in quayle's vice presidency and those of richard nixon and spiro agnew. the choice of nixon was viewed as a move by dwight eisenhower to appease the party's right wing, and agnew was seen as a political nonentity.
``the natural response is to use him (quayle) sparingly, as nixon did with agnew in 1968,'' hess says. ``however, quayle has four years to prove himself, and i think you're going to see stories in two years about how much he's learned, how much he's acted responsibly, how far he's come from the campaign of 1988.''
quayle admits the campaign was a learning process. after the controversies subsided, quayle declared his independence from his bush handlers, saying he would be his own man. he became more accessible to the media but continued to adhere to the schedule handed down from washington and to deliver the party's scripted message. soon, he dropped off the front pages.
and although he occasionally spoke out in frustration at having little control over his schedule and at ceasing to make national news, he played the role of loyal no. 2 and even trumpeted his new anonymity.
``we have arrived as being a traditional vice presidential nominee because we are either on the back pages or either not on the pages at all. that's what we're supposed to be,'' he told reporters.
that willingness to be a team player could serve him well in a bush white house, mahe feels, since bush wants ``a private adviser, whose experience and opinion he respected ... (who) has never had another agenda.''
``dan quayle owes his political life to one man and one man alone,'' mahe says. ``you're never going to see dan quayle telling tales out of school.''