
weather forecasters today were offering drought-stricken farmers little prospect of relief in separate outlooks for the next 30 days and three months.
a new climate assessment of the ongoing drought said ``many areas now experiencing extreme drought have less than a 4 percent chance of recovering from the drought within 3 months.''
the disappointing forecast came as president reagan headed to the midwest to inspect drought-plagued farms.
on tuesday the agriculture department reported sharp declines in the outlook for several crops.
that was followed wednesday by a 30-day forecast from the national weather service saying that drought-stricken areas from the dakotas east to new york and from the canadian border to oklahoma, arkansas and tennessee are likely to continue to be short of rain.
that area, which includes the major grain-growing states where crops already are suffering, is given a 55 percent chance of less than normal rainfall.
and some states in the center of the area, stretching from west virginia to nebraska and from wisconsin to missouri, may be even drier. they are given a 60 percent chance of being short of precipitation.
a slice of southern california, including los angeles, is the driest area in the forecast, with a 70 percent chance of having below normal rainfall. the rest of coastal california also will be dry, the forecast said.
the outlook also says there's a 55 percent chance of hotter than normal temperatures through the u.s. heartland from new england to idaho and from the canadian border to oklahoma. within that area, the chances of high temperatures are above 65 percent in wyoming, while central midwestern states have a 60 percent chance of above average temperatures.
wetter than normal weather is predicted for west and south texas, and parts of new mexico, arizona and utah. normal precipitation is forecast for the atlantic and gulf coast states, along with the northwest and northern mountain states.
the weather service said normal temperatures are expected for the atlantic states from virginia south, and for the gulf coast states. west texas and new mexico may be cooler than normal, but the far west is expected to see its normal quota of summer heat.
the separate drought impact assessment, issued by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's climate office, points out that predicting an end to the drought is a complex thing, since dry spells have no normal lifetime. the low 4 percent probability of an end within 3 months is based simply on a statistical analysis of past droughts, the agency said.
the report noted that as of the end of june, 29 percent of the continental united states was experiencing severe or extreme drought, with parts of 35 states affected. that puts the current drought on the same level as the one in 1911, but still less severe than the droughts of 1936, 1931, 1956 and 1934.