
an earthquake that devastated parts of nepal and india earlier this week has killed more than 980 people, officials from the two countries said friday.
mourners paraded through the streets of this medieval town, calling for revenge after a former legislator was beaten to death by political rivals while he was distributing relief supplies to earthquake victims.
``hang the murderers,'' scores of young men chanted as they marched in front of a jeep bearing the battered body of karna hyanju, once a sympathizer of the now-outlawed communist party.
witnesses said hyanju was beaten with umbrellas and sticks late thursday afternoon, then dragged through the streets for nearly two hours before police intervened. he died friday at the bir hospital in katmandu, 7 miles west of bhaktapur.
uttam dhaubanjar, a 28-year-old bank employee and neighbor of the dead man, said hyanju had been handing out blankets, milk and other food in bhaktapur when he was accosted by a group of men who accused him of giving relief supplies only to his own supporters.
reports of damage and devastation continued to arrive from remote parts of nepal on friday, and the home affairs ministry updated its confirmed death toll to 704.
in india, the official count rose to 277. but survivors, the news media and opposition politicians say the toll could be as high as 1,500.
sunday's earthquake registered 6.5 on the richter scale, which records energy released by a tremor according to ground motion measured by a seismograph. a reading of 6 indicates the possibility of severe damage, while 7 signifies a major quake.
dhaubanjar said he saw about 40 people rounded up by police thursday night after hyanju's beating death. he said many belonged to the same communist faction that hyanju once supported.
``people started beating him with umbrellas,'' dhaubanjar said. ``there were a lot of scratches on his body, and a lot of blood. it looked like one ear was missing. then they made a necklace of their shoes (by tying the laces together), put it around his neck and pulled him through the streets.''
as hyanju's body was taken through the winding streets of bhaktapur, a 12th-century town of ancient hindu temples, thousands of the town's 50,000 people jammed streets, temple steps and the balconies of brick and mud houses.
pashupati rana, one of several cabinet ministers who marched in the funeral procession, said several people were arrested in the killing, including the mayor, the deputy mayor and a member of the rashtriya panchayat, or non-partisan assembly.
rana, who is minister of local development and legislative, affairs, called hyanju's death ``political murder.''
hyanju served in the panchayat from 1981 until 1986 when he lost the backing of the communists in bhaktapur, traditionally a leftist stronghold.
the panchayat, whose members are elected on non-party lines, was created after the late king mahendra abolished the old parliament and all political parties in 1960, saying a western-style parliamentary system was not suited to his mountain kingdom.
dhaubanjar and a group of young men who gathered around him said hyanju was perceived as a government supporter despite his previous communist leanings.