
communism suffered its first big mac attack thursday as mcdonald's opened a restaurant in yugoslavia, and police were called in to keep customers who lined up for hours from getting too unruly under the golden arches.
``i just wanted to taste genuine american hamburgers,'' said milica nikolic, a high school student who waited for three hours to taste her first big mac.
people curiously examined the renovated restaurant's plush interior and the back-lit signs depicting the hamburgers, french fries, milk shakes and other fare more familiar in the west. it also featured amber-colored tables and floors, pastel-colored upholstery, modern art paintings and discreet illumination.
the fast-food outlet, located on a downtown square, had drawn crowds in recent days, and they began gathering long before it opened thursday.
police kept watch on the lines of customers snaking around the block, and they regulated the number who came inside to avoid overcrowding.
``no opening of a restaurant in belgrade has created such a sensation as this one today,'' one policeman said.
``i think this restaurant has no competition in belgrade,'' said milica danic, a housewife who treated her son to a cheeseburger. ``it is much cleaner, the service is faster, the interior is nicer and it is not too expensive.''
the belgrade media have suggested that the success of mcdonald's in yugoslavia depends on its acceptance by citizens long accustomed to a hamburger-like fast-food dish called the pljeskavica: ground pork and onions on a bun.
``in fact, this is a clash between the big mac and pljeskavica,'' said vesna milosevic, an official of genex, a yugoslav state-run enterprise that has contracted a joint venture agreement with mcdonald's.
``our aim is not to destroy the pljeskavica on the yugoslav market,'' said predrag dostanic, managing director of the genex-mcdonald's. ``we want to change customs of the local people used to completly different eating habits.''
he said that lounging at tables for a long time after a finished meal will draw a warning. also, smoking is forbidden and alcohol will not be served.
this contrasts sharply with the balkan and yugoslav custom of sitting with a drink in smoke-filled restaurants and chatting with friends after the meal.
the big mac meal, consisting of a hamburger, soft drink and french fries costs the equivalent of $2.57, or about as much the similar meal would cost in numerous pljeskavica joints around town.
sadik seljami, a waiter in a small pljeskavica outlet just a few hundred yards from the mcdonald's, suggested that the american restaurant wants to drive yugoslav fast-food outlets out of business.
``however, we will not give up the fight even if we have to lower the prices,'' said seljami.
glen cook, an executive of the mcdonald's corp., said during the opening ceremonies, ``we are very excited about the opening of this restaurant, not only because it is the first one in a communist country, but also because it is one of the nicest in europe.''
mcdonald's and genex contribute $1 million each for the flagship restaurant. they will also share the profits equally even though it will be managed entirely by yugoslavs.
the restaurant has 350 seats and employs 110 people capable of serving 2,500 meals per hour. in an effort to keep a high level of services, the management is entitled to fire any employees who fail to perform.
the american corporation plans to open five additional restaurants yugoslavia in the next five years. the next east european mcdonald's, and the first in a soviet bloc country, is to open next month in budapest, hungary.