
dan quayle has not yet been nominated for vice president and already republicans are comparing him to thomas jefferson and john f. kennedy.
sen. john warner of virginia, who served with quayle on a senate subcommittee, told an audience that whenever he heard the indiana senator speak, ``i'd say, `there stands the next thomas jefferson.'''
and, added warner, ``he does have the same fire in his belly as our great forefather thomas jefferson of virginia.''
former president gerald ford made the comparison with kennedy, a democrat.
``in 1960, the american people voted for john f. kennedy for president and he was the relatively same age as dan quayle,'' said ford. ``john kennedy had been in the house and senate 14 years before he was elected president and dan quayle's had 12 years.''
what quayle thinks of those references isn't known. but he doesn't like it when people say he looks like movie idol robert redford.
whether, indeed, he looks like redford seems to be in the eye of the beholder. in the parlance of politics, it's an issue. they are both male. they are both blond.
the so-called resemblance became a point of contention in the 1980 senate race and redford took umbrage. the actor, who once played the role of a presidential office seeker in ``the candidate'' sent quayle a telegram telling him to stop the look-alike references in his congressional campaign literature.
quayle said the news media had made the comparison, not he, and after he was elected sent redford an autographed picture of himself.
and this week, he told reporters he considered the so-called redford look ``a stigma.'' he wasn't asked how he felt about being painted as another jefferson or kennedy.
meanwhile, fellow senators were trying to publicize quayle who, at 41, hasn't had a chance to become a legend. he is a republican vice presidential candidate who is not, as spiro agnew once said of himself, a household word.
to help him get known, eight fellow senators wednesday took turns telling reporters how much they liked him.
``we know him well,'' said strom thurmond, r-s.c.
``he's attractive because of his looks, he's attractive because of his enthusiasm,'' said sen. john mccain, r-ariz.
``i think dan quayle, although he's 41 years of age, he's going to send a message to the american people that the republican party respects young people who achieve,'' said sen. pete domenici, r-n.m.
oh, yes, he's also rich, but the senators said that should not hold him back.
``let's not start this business of who's wealthy,'' sen. alfonse d'amato, r-n.y.