
here is a transcript of the speech by sen. bob dole of kansas nominating sen. dan quayle of indiana for vice president at the republican national convention on thursday night.
thank you. thank you.
mr. chairman, four of my congressional colleagues and i are here for the purpose of nominating the next vice president of the united states.
we are here to nominate one of the bright young lights in the republican party, a man i am proud to say is my colleague, the junior senator from indiana, dan quayle.
you know, senators get a lot of mail. party leaders more than most. and almost every one of these letters asks for help with some problem.
well, three years ago, i received a handwritten plea from a 6-year-old girl who after several days of long, long senate sessions had a very special problem.
she wrote, and i quote: ``i have my second-grade play tonight. please make sure my daddy can come home and watch me.''
i knew corinne quayle was from a political family because she invited me to come along, too.
corinne and her brothers, tucker and benjamin, and their mother, marilyn, share dan quayle with the people of indiana and the united states senate.
dan quayle is a dedicated public servant and a devoted family man.
and whenever i needed him, whenever i needed him, dan was there _ ready and willing to make the tough choices, to cast the tough votes, to transform president reagan's vision of america into the law of the land.
whether it was the budget or defense, tax reform or the inf treaty, dan quayle was there, a forceful advocate, and a staunch supporter of the reagan revolution. and now he is ready to carry that revolution forward.
and believe me he is ready, and just let the democrats try to use experience as a measuring stick in this campaign. just let them try.
now, i don't mean to suggest their presidential candidate lacks experience. he's got plenty of experience, plenty of experience _ experience in raising taxes again and again, experience in vetoing the pledge of allegiance in public schools, experience in increasing spending year after year after year in massachusetts.
and i just don't believe the american people want that kind of experience in the white house.
it sounds like a dukak-eyed idea to me.
but dan quayle's got experience, too. he's already spent 12 years as a congressman and a senator, tackling the vital national and international issues that affect the lives of all americans and the future of our country.
that is 12 more years of national experience than michael dukakis _ and he is running for president.
as i said at the start, dan quayle is a man i know and trust. i am honored to nominate him for vice president, mr. chairman.
and for the purpose of debate only, i yield the balance of my time to the outstanding, distinguished senior from indiana, my good friend, sen. dick lugar.