
a biography that portrays john lennon as a drug-addled, anorexic bisexual who raged his way from liverpool to new york city is ``totally fiction,'' yoko ono said in a national radio broadcast.
``it's amazing that somebody took such a poetic license. i don't see john in there ... it's a very dramatically described something, but it's not about john,'' ono said wednesday night in her first broadcast comments on the book by albert goldman.
the usually reclusive ono agreed to the interview to counter goldman's ``the lives of john lennon,'' which presents the ex-beatle as a violent, drug-addicted drunk who wanted to dump his wife.
as for ono, goldman shows her as a gold-digger who snorted heroin up to the time of lennon's death. goldman also charges she was responsible for paul mccartney's 1980 marijuana bust in japan, had affairs while they were married and was just as intent on a divorce as lennon.
ono refuted virtually all of these charges, and countered through taped interviews with lennon friends and employees that goldman's book was based on unreliable sources and misquotes.
``it's totally fiction,'' yoko said during the hour-long program, which opened with lennon's song, ``gimme some truth,'' and coincided with the book's national release wednesday.
``these people in this book are not us. it's not john and me,'' ono continued. ``it's unfair he's been assaulted and can't hit back. ... for some reason this book is attempting to rob both john and i of the basic human dignity that we're entitled to.''
the ono interview was taped aug. 28 at the dakota, where the lennons lived _ and yoko still lives with their son, sean. lennon was murdered by mark david chapman outside the dakota on dec. 8, 1980.
the interview was broadcast nationwide via the westwood one network; spokeswoman laurie wilde said an exact figure on how many stations picked up the broadcast was not available.
also appearing were sean and lennon other son, julian. ono was interviewed by longtime associate elliot mintz, who is described in goldman's book as a spy for yoko _ a charge mintz denied during the show.
``it is, for one, very upsetting, but most of all it is lies, untruths ... the whole thing is just sickening,'' said julian, who also refuted goldman's tales of lennon as a violent father.
mintz read excerpts from the book to yoko, who then responded to the allegations point by point. she denied that lennon was homosexual; that he was using drugs while living at the dakota with his son, sean; that he had become a reclusive rock 'n' roll howard hughes.
she did acknowledge having a heroin problem during the late 1970s, but rejected goldman's assertion that she had a $5,000-a-week habit.
the book has already drawn angry responses from friends of lennon and ono mccartney, who contradicted one anecdote involving lennon smashing a painting in paul's home, has urged a boycott of the book.
after yoko's rebuttal, listeners were invited to dial 900-digit telephone numbers to vote on whether the book was an accurate portrayal of the lennons' life. results were not expected until later today.
goldman, who conducted more than 1,200 interviews for his lennon book, has written controversial biographies of comedian lenny bruce and elvis presley.