
republican vice presidential candidate dan quayle's official resume says he was the indiana consumer protection division's chief investigator a year before the unit was created, state records show.
the law creating the unit passed april 14, 1971, and took effect july 1. officials said quayle served as chief investigator from july until mid-september, when he became administrative assistant to then-gov. edgar d. whitcomb.
quayle's senate biography, which his campaign is using as his official background, says he was chief investigator of the unit in the attorney general's office from 1970 to 1971.
``he was assigned to our section in the spring of 1971,'' said robert smith, the unit's first director and now an attorney in indianapolis.
``he was in fact the chief investigator. he helped get the unit set up. (but) it would not have been before 1971,'' smith said friday in a telephone interview. ``we formally began operations july 1.''
quayle conceded friday that the resume entry was ``inaccurate'' and said his staff had written the document.
``if it indicated that, that is inaccurate. i didn't hold that job for two years,'' quayle told reporters aboard his campaign plane.
earlier, however, quayle spokesman david prosperi called the revelation of the error by the plain dealer of cleveland ``a cheap shot.''
quayle was hired as an entry-level research assistant by the state attorney general's office in 1970 after he returned from six months of basic and advanced training for the indiana national guard.
quayle, a 1969 graduate of depauw university, was attending indiana university law school at the time.
m. stanton evans, then an editor with the indianapolis news, helped arrange his job interview with the state. evans worked for eugene c. pulliam, quayle's grandfather and publisher of the news.
``at no point in any of this did dan quayle ask any favors or use any influence,'' said evans, now with the national journalism center in washington, d.c.
``he wouldn't have been hired as a chief investigator. he was hired in an entry-level job and was promoted to a whole bunch of jobs on his merits. it's a nothing story,'' evans said.
theodore sendak, the attorney general at the time, recently had surgery and is unable to comment, according to his son, timothy sendak.
patricia gifford, a marion superior court judge who was then an assistant attorney general, said friday that prior to the establishment of the consumer protection division, ``all complaints and inquiries were handled by me. the legal assistant assigned to me and utilized as my chief investigator was dan quayle.'' her statement was released by the quayle campaign.
the consumer protection division was created by the state legislature to resolve complaints over defective products, false claims in ads, faulty speedometer readings and mail-order fraud.
in 1980, quayle referred to himself as a ``vietnam-era veteran'' in campaign literature when he was running against three-term incumbent birch bayh in a senate race.
quayle, who enlisted in the indiana national guard, dropped the reference after objections by some vietnam combat veterans.
in that same election, which he won, quayle said he was ``on active duty for several periods during his tenure'' in the guard. the statement referred to periods when quayle was in basic training and 15 days of camp each summer.