
dan quayle's sister believes the indiana senator won't let his candidacy for vice president hurt the family life he and his wife, marilyn, enjoy.
``i don't think it will be tough on the family,'' said martha saddler, quayle's sister, who lives in huntington, ind. ``since he's been in politics, we all kind of shake our heads at his hectic schedule and wonder how he does it. but he does it and loves it.''
the quayle family and friends were celebrating tuesday afternoon after george bush announced he wants the 41-year-old indiana senator to be the republican nominee for vice president.
those who have known the quayles for years said the senator and his wife have remained relatively unchanged by their years in public life.
dan and marilyn quayle met as law students in indianapolis, married while they were still in school and remain close to many of their friends from that period.
``one of the greatest things about him is the job of being a senator has not changed him a bit,'' said indianapolis attorney william r. neale, treasurer of quayle's 1986 re-election campaign. ``he's the same nice guy he was in law school.''
neale, who grew up with marilyn tucker quayle in indianapolis, introduced dan quayle to his future wife at a student gathering at the indiana university law school in the early 1970s.
dan quayle, who grew up in huntington, graduated from depauw university, a small liberal arts college in greencastle, ind., before going to work in the indiana attorney general's office in 1970.
daniel f. evans, also a law school classmate of dan quayle, said he doesn't expect quayle's national candidacy to change him.
``i think his strength is he'll remember who his friends are even after this,'' said evans, who was chairman of quayle's 1986 campaign.
friends said the quayles are devoted to their three children and prefer quiet nights at home to nights out on the town in washington.
``his family looks like the family both parties are trying to appeal to,'' said mitch daniels, former political chief in the white house and now president of the hudson institute. ``it's a beautiful family. i think they'll be a real asset.''
the couple, who married in 1972, have a 14-year-old son, tucker; a 12-year-old son, benjamin; and a 9-year-old daughter, corinne.
when they campaign in indiana, the quayles often tour in two groups _ the boys riding in parades with marilyn quayle and corinne and her father visiting county fairs.
``the kids are nonchalant, normal kids,'' said mrs. saddler. ``they take it in stride and play.''
in an interview with indiana reporters monday, the quayles said they had worried during the vice presidential speculation about the family's loss of privacy during a national campaign.
``the total lack of privacy is going to be the biggest minus,'' said mrs. quayle, 39.
quayle said he had questioned each of his children about whether he should accept the vice presidential spot if bush offered it.
tucker was fascinated by the idea, quayle said. benjamin was ambiguous but he thought secret service agents might be able to help him on tests at school, mrs. quayle said.
corinne didn't like the prospect of having her father spend more time away from home, quayle said.
``she told me, `daddy, i really hope george bush picks bob dole,''' said quayle.