
overcrowding and safety violations caused an aging ferry to capsize in the ganges river, killing as many as 400 people, a government report said. the ferry accident was said to be india's worst ever.
strong currents hampered efforts today to pull the two-decker from the rising monsoon-swollen river. hundreds of relatives stood by watching.
a senior government official, discussing the confidential report on condition of anonymity, said authorities believed at least 300 people on the lower deck died when the ferry overturned saturday morning.
about 200 people were on the upper deck, he said. authorities believe about 100 people swam to safety or were rescued by villagers.
only about a dozen bodies have been found, and most of the missing were believed trapped inside the 35-year-old ferry.
``it was badly overcrowded. the situation was made more dangerous by wheat bags loaded on the ferry. many lives could have been saved if the ferry had carried water safety equipment such as life jackets,'' said the senior official.
survivors said they protested when 150 bags of wheat were loaded onto the ferry. the steam-powered vessel started wavering soon after it left the banks and capsized about 100 yards from the shore.
navy divers attempted to reach the submerged boat today, but the river was too muddy and its current too swift, said h.s. pathak, head of the eight-member diving team.
``we are trying our best, but because of the current, we are not able to go near the launch,'' pathak said. ``the water is too muddy. we can't see anything, so we just have to feel by our hands.''
authorities said the water was still rising and the submerged boat was sinking in the river bed. the water depth was estimated at 12 to 30 feet.
katihar commissioner madan mohan singh estimated the boat was resting in about six feet of sand.
``we are planning to break the ferry. only then will we be able to get the bodies out,'' singh said.
katihar district police chief p.s. natarajah said chances of finding any survivors were ``very, very dim.''
he said the death toll may never be known because some bodies probably were carried downstream 30 to 60 miles by the surging water.
the ferry was designed to carry about 160 people, but was was always overcrowded, he said. jetty workers, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said 535 tickets were sold for the trip.
katihar police inspector n. kumar said about 2,000 relatives and residents were waiting along the rain-swollen river for the bodies to be recovered.
``police are trying to control the crowds and console them,'' he said.
family members railed against authorities as numerous officials arrived to review recovery efforts.
``give back our family members. we don't want (government) ministers,'' they shouted.
one survivor, chadrasekhar d. tiwary, said he was standing on the ferry's upper deck when it started wavering.
``as soon as the ferry tilted, i knew we were going down. i saw three women crying for help. they probably drowned,'' the 50-year-old farmer said.
ram prasad yadaw's wife and four other family members vanished in the accident.
``the women and children suffered the worst. they had to sit on the lower deck,'' he said. ``i am sure my wife is dead.''
it was the worst boat accident ever in india, according to the united news of india. at least 150 people died on july 5, 1970, when a boat capsized in krishna river in eastern india.
the navy divers came from new delhi, the indian capital about 650 miles west of katihar.
mangan chand, a police officer, said only one body surfaced near the ferry sunday. ten to 12 bodies were found saturday, according to bihar state officials.
chand said his father and uncle were aboard the ferry. he said he was waiting for the bodies so he could cremate them according to hindu rites.
the boat trip is normally used by hindu pilgrims going across the river to worship at a shrine of lord shiva in deoghar town. lord shiva is the destroyer diety in the hindu trinity.
boat accidents are common during the annual monsoon rains when major rivers overflow their banks.