
leonard bernstein, whose 70th birthday in august was marked with a gala at tanglewood, returned to carnegie hall with the new york philharmonic 45 years after he made his triumphant conducting debut there with the orchestra.
and of course, monday night's program consisted of three bernstein compositions that were played shimmeringly well. as well it should: it was the 1,215th time bernstein conducted the orchestra.
on nov. 14, 1943, bernstein, the philharmonic's then-assistant conductor, filled for an ailing bruno walter on such short notice there was no rehearsal. the concert was broadcast nationally on radio. and there was such acclaim that bernstein, who had never led the orchestra in concert until that day, was catapulted to fame, at age 25.
at intermission, mrs. artur rodzinski, whose late husband was the philharmonic music's director in 1943 and hired bernstein as his assistant, was introduced from a box.
violinist jacques margolies, who played in the philharmonic that sunday, is still a member and was playing on monday night. eight others who also were members in 1943 _ violinist louis fishzohn, oboist albert goltzer, timpanist saul goodman, bassist homer mensch, cellist martin ormandy, assistant concertmaster michael rosenker, and trumpeters james smith and william vacchiano _ went on stage.
bernstein gave bear hugs to all nine.
``i feel older than all of them,'' said bernstein.
bernstein was given a silver box engraved with a reproduction of monday evening's program cover _ a caricature of him, with jutting chin, bright eye, flowing hair and baton, and reading ``with love and thanks of the philharmonic family to lennie.''
``will this birthday never end?,'' he told the audience.
monday's concert began with bernstein's ``chichester psalms,'' with the splendid westminster symphonic choir. todd caruso, a member of the american boychoir whose voice is high, pure and moving, sang the solo part.
violinist gidon kremer, a native of the latvian town of riga in the soviet union, was soloist in ``serenade for violin, string orchestra, harp and percussion.'' kremer's sound isn't warm but his technique is breathtaking.
pianist krystian zimerman, who was born in zabrze, poland, often performs with bernstein in europe. he was the respectful and thoroughly engaged soloist in the final work on the program, bernstein's ``symphony no. 2 for piano and orchestra,'' subtitled ``the age of anxiety'' after w.h. auden's poem.
all the performers donated their services, with proceeds benefiting the philharmonic's efforts on behalf of american conductors.