
gone from tiananmen square are the pro-democracy banners and the tents of china's freedom movement, replaced by tanks, armed guards and the chants of drilling soldiers.
the army on thursday allowed the people of beijing their first glance of the 100-acre expanse since the military swept into the capital six days ago, leaving hundreds dead and crushing a movement for political change.
troops moved back their barricades, making it possible for city residents to walk to the edge of the square, which for seven weeks stood at the heart of the movement. buses and bicyclists today were allowed to pass by changan avenue, which borders the north edge of the square.
the spot once occupied by the goddess of democracy, a 33-foot-high replica of the statue of liberty, was taken by a tread-wheeled armored personnel carrier. when students built the statue last week, for a few days it became a symbol of the movement for democratic reforms and an end to official corruption. on sunday morning, a tank crushed it.
in all, 80 tanks and 40 armored personnel carriers lined the northern part of the square.
the monument to revolutionary martyrs, where the students took a final stand early sunday, was swept clean. poems and posters calling for a more open china have disappeared from its sides.
chinese red cross officials estimate 3,600 people were killed and 60,000 injured over the weekend, citing a chinese students' organization, the union of chinese students in west germany. the government says nearly 300 people, mostly soldiers, were killed; diplomats and chinese say up to 3,000 died.
soldiers drilled in tiananmen's center, their cadenced shouting echoing around the vast expanse. a crowd of officials stood on the roof of the great hall of the people, overlooking the square. from this same roof five days earlier officials watched as a jubilant mass of demonstrators enveloped 5,000 troops and blocked their entry to the square.
inside the square, soldiers could be seen shuffling about, their uniformed jackets stripped off, wash basins in hand. there was a relaxed air of the inside of an army barracks as unarmed troops carried food and walked slowly together, talking and laughing in groups.
the area once housing students' tents has become a holding area for a huge fleet of troop trucks.
on the southern perimeter, a single line of tanks and a cordon of soldiers blocked the square from the thousands of bicylists who pedaled slowly by, peering into tiananmen.
near the square, troops placed barbed wire in front of one street. soldiers were billeted in a construction site, their laundered fatigues drying on the scaffolding. next door, troops, their assault rifles slung nonchalantly over their shoulders, stood and chatted outside a discotheque.
``they look like they ,'' said one local resident. ``i hope they know that we still don't want them here.''