
he's ranked as the richest man in the nation by a leading business magazine, but to folks in bentonville, a town of about 8,700 people, sam walton is just another neighbor.
``he's just a part of the community,'' said curt loyd, executive director of the bentonville chamber of commerce. ``he's a neat person. he calls bentonville home, and that is special to us.''
walton, who prefers bird-hunting, tennis and opening new wal-mart stores to trumpeting his personal financial holdings, is again shunning publicity about his third consecutive ranking among the world's top billionaires. according to forbes magazine's july 24 edition, the walton family's estimated worth is $8.7 billion, up from its 1988 estimate of $6.5 billion.
``he is unavailable,'' said wal-mart spokesman don shinkle of the silver-haired founder of the nation's third-largest retail chain, based in bentonville, about 150 miles northwest of little rock.
shinkle said he received about 10 calls from reporters monday morning, when the forbes list appeared in newspapers. shinkle said news coverage about walton ``usually sets off a press frenzy'' for comments from him. but the 71-year-old businessman declined to comment.
``he feels any attention to sam walton is to the individual and he prefers attention to sam walton (the founder of) the company,'' shinkle said.
``he very seldom schedules interviews about his feelings. it just puts him in a position he doesn't want to be.''
but walton occasionally offers peeks that reveal personal modesty. just after the 1987 stock market crash, in which walton's family-owned chunk of wal-mart stock lost millions in value, he quipped in response to questions at a news conference on another topic that it was only paper. walton then changed the subject.
walton was first listed by forbes as the nation's richest man in october 1985. three years ago, forbes also began listing the world's wealthiest people. walton made that listing as the richest american every year since. this year he ranks third, behind two japanese businessmen.
shinkle said walton stays busy visiting many of the more than 1,400 stores operated by the company he started as a single five-and-dime at rogers more than two decades ago. he is out of the office up to four days a week, the spokesman said.
``he spends most of his time talking to associates and customers,'' shinkle said, ``and he always comes back with many ideas from them.''
wal-mart calls its sales help associates instead of employees.
when walton first made the forbes list of richest americans, recalled little rock investment banker warren simpson, calls came in from all over about the billionaire from the ozarks.
``they wanted to know about the stock and the company,'' said simpson, who works for stephens inc. ``you'd think that he'd be living in new york or la, not bentonville, arkansas. but now people just accept it.
``when it comes out now, it's just, `yeah, he's still there,''' simpson said.