
chancellor helmut kohl assured visiting u.s. senators on the eve of a superpower summit that west germany will not forsake nato to reunite with east germany, one of the senators said friday.
``he strongly affirmed under no circumstances would a reunified germany be neutral,'' sen. richard g. lugar, head of the american delegation, said of the friday meeting with kohl.
asked whether he thought the west germans were committed to staying in the nato military alliance of western nations, the indiana republican said: ``without any reservations.''
there is growing discussion in west germany about german reunification as a result of sweeping social and political reforms underway in east germany. there has been speculation that west germany might someday be tempted to agree to neutrality if the kremlin stipulates it as the price for reunification.
kohl on tuesday unveiled a 10-point proposal with german reunification as its ultimate goal. but the soviets, who suffered millions of deaths fighting a unified germany in world war ii, have said the idea of german reunification is ``dangerous and unrealistic.''
president bush and soviet president mikhail s. gorbachev are to begin a shipboard summit off malta on saturday. the dramatic events in east germany and whirlwind reforms elsewhere in the east bloc are likely to be a main topic of their talks.
lugar came to bonn with eight other members of the u.s. senate's arms control observer group. he said the purpose of the trip was to ``visit with the germans on their judgments about all of these procedures that are going on.''
u.s. ambassador vernon a. walters joined the senators for their 75-minute closed-door talks with kohl. the senators also met with foreign minister hans-dietrich genscher and defense minister gerhard stoltenberg during the day.
lugar said kohl told the americans that reunification would be a ``procedure that depends on many events in germany and europe'' and that the soviet union and the united states have a role to play.
lugar said of kohl's proposals, ``there is much to work with there with regard to the future of germany and the future of the (nato) alliance.''