
here is a state-by-state look at the tornadoes and severe thunderstorms that have killed at least 27 people, injured more than 500 and left hundreds homeless since wednesday:
_alabama: seventeen people were killed in huntsville on wednesday when a tornado touched down just before rush hour, causing major damage. there were 463 injuries and about 1,000 people left homeless, authorities said. three people were injured in an earlier tornado in clay county in eastern alabama.
_district of columbia: heavy thunderstorms packing 50-60 mph winds swept through the washington area during the thursday morning rush hour, flooding some streets. about 10,000 customers lost power, mostly in the maryland suburbs. no injuries were reported.
_georgia: 19 people were injured, four critically, and at least 200 people were evacuated wednesday after a tornado struck two mobile home parks and an interstate highway near palmetto, about 25 miles southeast of atlanta.
_illinois: strong winds wednesday morning destroyed about 15 homes and killed one woman in st. clair county in southwestern illinois. damage was estimated at $3 million to $5 million.
_indiana: a tornado was spotted wednesday afternoon around richmond, close to the ohio border. it ripped the top off a silo and tipped a semi-trailer into a ditch. the driver was slightly injured.
_kentucky: the storm wednesday left at least 28 people injured; damage was estimated at $2.5 million or more. a storm believed to have been a tornado cut a mile-long swath of destruction through the town of flaherty in meade county. damage was also reported in bullitt, larue, hardin and pendleton counties.
_maryland, delaware: heavy winds on thursday leveled a church building in kent county, md., lifted roofs from buildings in baltimore and cut power to tens of thousands of utility customers, authorities said. reports of tornado damage came from kent county, md., and hockessin, del. national weather service officials were unable to immediately confirm the reports. no injuries were reported.
_mississippi: scattered damage and power outages were reported wednesday after radar showed tornadoes in neshoba and kemper counties in the east-central portion of the state. no injuries were reported.
_new jersey: high winds and tornadoes were blamed for one death, at least four injuries and widespread damage and power outages thursday. a tornado touched down in piscataway shortly after noon, collapsing on house and damaging 10 to 12 others. one person suffered a minor injury. a bridge connecting elizabeth with new york city was closed after two tractor trailers overturned in heavy winds; one truck driver died and a passenger was injured. two minor injuries were reported in bergen county.
_new york: a severe thunderstorm thursday sent a tree crashing through an elementary school roof in newburgh, about 60 miles north of new york city, killing at least seven children and injuring 18, authorities said. in new york city, a woman was killed by a 12-foot steel beam that apparently had blown off her apartment's water tower. tornadoes were reported in peekskill, just north of the city.
_north carolina: a pair of tornadoes were reported wednesday in henderson county, where a vacant house was destroyed. no injuries were reported.
_ohio: high winds described by local authorities as a tornado hopscotched across north-central ohio on wednesday, ripping roofs off barns and houses, destroying farm sheds and damaging trailer homes. one man was hospitalized from a lightning strike and a woman was slightly injured by flying debris.
_pennsylvania: high winds and funnel clouds ripped off roofs and downed trees in eastern pennslyvania on thursday, shattering windows in philadelphia skyscrapers. no serious injuries were reported, but at least 75,000 customers in southeastern pennsylvania lost power.
_south carolina: a tornado wednesday downed power lines and damaged 20 houses near greenwood. no injuries were reported.
_west virginia: high winds knocked over trees, ripped roofs off houses and toppled a trailer early thursday in jefferson county, just west of frederick, md., injuring four members of one family, two seriously. the national weather service said the storm probably was a tornado.