
amid the uproar of live coverage by the major networks and scores of other media organizations, national hurricane center forecasters went about their business of monitoring hurricane hugo.
``the whole system looks chaotic, but it works,'' said bob sheets, the center's director.
on one side of a large room dominated by a u-shaped bank of monitoring equipment were the forecasters, making meticulous calculations about where the deadly hurricane will strike and getting emergency operations going in those areas.
on the other side were the media _ a pack of reporters, camera operators and technicians, jockeying for seconds of sheets' time and tidbits of his expertise.
in the center was sheets himself. surrounded by cameras, wires and two dozen journalists with pads and telephones, the ubiquitous red-headed meteorologist has appeared on television all week next to a large satellite monitor showing colorful images of hurricane hugo.
during prime news time, competing technicians and cameramen shout and make rude hand gestures for people to get out of their shots of sheets.
at his back, casually dressed forecasters who have been working 12-hour days tracked the storm via computers and satellites.
``we obviously don't like this and could probably do a better job, but everyone knows now because of the media,'' said hurricane specialist max mayfield. ``in the caribbean, we were not so certain the word got out. but we know the carolinas have been evacuated.''
when a hurricane warning goes into effect, ``it's a $50 million statement,'' said meteorologist joel cline, referring to the cost of emergency preparations and evacuation plans that must be implemented when the warning is posted.
``if we weren't here, then you wouldn't know that a storm was out there,'' he said. before the hurricane warning system was established, a storm of hugo's power would have cost thousands of lives. but early today, after days of warnings and proper evacuation procedures, there were no immediate reports of deaths despite widespread damage in charleston and other coastal areas of south carolina.
``i like to think that we make a difference a far as human lives are concerned,'' cline said.
after hugo's landfall, sheets and the other forecasters began to wind down from the hectic pace they had maintained for the last several days. but, he warned, the hurricane center still is following three other weather systems that have moved into the atlantic between the united states and africa, and another storm in the pacific.
``i hate to say we're breathing a sigh of relief because people are getting clobbered to death,'' meteorologist mark zimmer said as the storm pounded charleston, s.c. ``but we've done all we can.''