
the 16-inch guns on the uss iowa, which can lob a shell the weight of a volkswagen 23 miles, have an outdated design that is unfit in the nuclear missile age, critics say.
``they're old-fashioned and inherently dangerous. they all ought to be eliminated,'' retired rear adm. eugene larocque of the center for defense information said thursday. ``i don't know what more it takes to get people to recognize this ancient technology is no longer appropriate on warships.''
but the navy defended the 16-inch gun, the mightiest in use on any ocean, after an explosion killed 47 sailors wednesday aboard the battleship iowa while a turret crew loaded gunpowder for target practice.
``this gun ... remains the finest naval gun in the world. it was the pinnacle of gun design art, and it is still a front-line system,'' said capt. larry seaquist, commander of the iowa until last may.
the main criticism is that the big gun requires gunpowder packed in silk bags to fire 16-inch-diameter shells from its 62-foot-long barrel. it works like the breech-loaded guns that roared during the civil war: a shell is placed into a barrel and then charged with gunpowder in a separate package.
in the iowa's case, 660 pounds of powder _ six 110-pound bags _ is needed to fire a projectile weighing up to 2,700 pounds at a speed of 2,500 feet per second. an electric spark ignites the powder.
the extremely flammable silk is supposed to burn away during the burst, but some red-hot debris may remain or explosive gases can build up in the barrel. air pressurized to 3,000 pounds per square inch can be blown into the breech to clear away debris to guard against a ``blowback,'' which happens when powder ignites before the breech is closed.
in newer guns, powder is packed in metal containers. missiles, the backbone of the modern navy's attack capability, have integrated propellants.
capt. james bush of the center for defense information, a private think tank often critical of pentagon policy, said the iowa explosion could have been caused by smoldering debris, a blowback or a mishap in the handling of powder.
``it wasn't unexpected. it wasn't a surprise. this is dangerous technology. it's archaic,'' bush said. ``these are the only guns in the navy that still used bagged powder.''
the navy said thursday that none of the guns in the iowa turret had been fired before the explosion took place.
the navy also on thursday placed a moratorium on firing the big guns, found only on the iowa and its three sister battleships, the new jersey, the wisconsin and the missouri.
in a larger sense, critics say the battleships themselves, once the mainstay of gunboat diplomacy, have outlived their purpose.
despite 16-inch-thick armor plating, the battlewagons are vulnerable to submarine and missile attack. the 20-mile range of the 16-inch guns is almost worthless in an era when missiles can be fired at much greater distances.
``we can do almost anything with a missile and do it better,'' bush said.
battleships reached their heyday in world war i and were intended to fight other ships.
the iowa, first launched in 1942, was the first of an entire class of u.s. battlewagons built to conquer japan.
it supported marine amphibious landings and shelled shore targets, but the aircraft carrier emerged as the navy's top weapon because naval battles were waged without ships ever seeing each other. the iowa also fought off korea.
the iowa and three sister warships were ordered out of mothballs in the reagan administration's military buildup six years ago. they were upgraded with tomahawk cruise missiles, 20mm guns and harpoon missiles.
one of the battleships, the new jersey, bombarded syrian and druze positions in lebanon as part the u.s. peacekeeping role in 1983. but the 16-inch guns often missed their targets, which the navy blamed on unreliable powder from world war ii.
``there was no military need to return these ships to active duty,'' said the cdi's larocque. ``their only military utility is to bombard third world countries, and the era of gunboat diplomacy is over.''