
the store manager of the wal-mart in this community on the outskirts of dallas tells a story that gives an insight into the man considered responsible for a retailing phenomenon.
manager don bost remembers one day last summer when a secretary telephoned from wal-mart stores inc.'s corporate headquarters in bentonville, ark. chairman sam walton was about to land at a nearby airport and the secretary asked if someone could fetch him and bring him to the de soto store.
paying unexpected calls on stores is one way walton has kept in close touch with everyday goings-on. his example is followed by other wal-mart executives and most make a point of spending a lot of time in the field.
says ed nagy, district manager for 9 stores in the dallas metropolitan area, ``it's not like `uh-oh, someone's coming,' because they're always out.''
by all accounts, sam walton's personality permeates operations throughout the company.
everyone, from wal-mart president and chief operating officer david glass down to an hourly store worker, can readily quote the gospel according to sam, as he is called.
to paraphrase sam's primary rules of retailing, ``rule no.1 is the customer is always right. rule no.2 says just in case the customer's wrong, revert to rule no.1.''
if the principles sound old-fashioned and homespun, they are because that's the way sam is, people who know him say.
he shuns the limelight that his company's success has shed on him and has decided to refuse almost all press requests for interviews.
he's happy to chat with folks in his stores, though.
he also regularly reminds wal-mart ``associates'' that hospitality to customers is crucial. he preaches it in person or via high-tech satellite hookup with his stores.
wal-mart employees became known as associates under a company effort to prove it cared about employees, partly to thwart a union organizing effort in the late 1960s.
one of the most sensitive subjects for walton is the fortune he's amassed.
a close associate says sam would ``probably give anything'' not to be named on fortune magazine's list of the country's wealthiest people. the magazine has estimated that his immediate family's stake in wal-mart stock is worth about $6.8 billion.
``sam walton is more interested in his backhand than he is in his bank account,'' says don shinkle, wal-mart spokesman.
samuel moore walton turns 71 on march 29. he was born in kingfisher, okla., and grew up as the son of a farm-mortgage banker.
he graduated from the university of missouri with an economics degree in 1940 and joined j.c. penney co. as a management trainee in des moines, iowa. after serving three years in the army, he went to arkansas and opened a ben franklin five-and-dime store, eventually becoming the company's biggest franchisee.
the seeds of the wal-mart empire were sown when sam and his brother james l., or bud, opened the first wal-mart discount city in 1962. the rest will probably earn an entry in the history of u.s. retail trade.
bud is a senior vice president and board member of wal-mart. three of the four grown children sam and his wife helen had are involved with the company in various capacities.
sam hasn't slowed much, enjoying hunting and tennis as much as ever, and is said not to suffer after effects from a bout with leukemia, now in remission. he spends less time in the office since handing over most responsiblities to david glass. sam is still chairman of the board.
glass doesn't hesitate when asked if wal-mart can flourish without sam. the answer is an emphatic yes because, he says, ``we have great people.'' the walton family will always be involved, he adds.
commenting on the future, glass says: ``we'll be judged on what we produce today. tomorrow, what we've done in the past won't matter.''