
federal aid was approved friday for tornado-ravaged huntsville, where 17 died and several hundred were injured or lost their homes, and gov. guy hunt toured hospitals and visited with grieving families.
``i've been around a lot of tornadoes, but i've not seen the type of damage on as broad a scale as i've seen this morning,'' hunt said after a helicopter tour of the 10-mile-long path of destruction.
state emergency management officials estimated the damage in excess of $100 million in the agency's letter to president bush requesting a disaster declaration, said terry abbott, the governor's press secretary.
``i've never seen as much rubble from a tornado before,'' said danny cooper, the state agency's director.
he listed 119 houses destroyed, 125 with minor damage, and three churches, two schools, 35 businesses and 10 public buildings either destroyed or suffering heavy damage.
wind in the tornado was estimated at 250 mph when the twister hit wednesday afternoon.
more than 400 people were injured, with about 80 still under care in hospitals when hunt visited patients' rooms friday. city officials said about 1,000 were left homeless.
hunt asked that flags around the state be lowered to half-staff through tuesday in memory of the victims, and marilyn quayle, wife of the vice president, planned to visit the battered city saturday.
president bush issued a disaster declaration friday morning to clear the way for tornado victims to receive federal relief. cooper said about $1 million may be needed in the form of individual and family grants to provide clothing and temporary housing. the federal government pays 75 percent of the cost and the state 25 percent.
grant peterson, associate director of the federal emergency management agency, said friday he hopes that offices can be opened sunday to take applications for disaster relief. he said assistance checks may be in the mail within a week. fema's reaction time was criticized after south carolina was struck by a hurricane.
police spokesman ronnie fudge said several truckloads of food had arrived but the city is running out of places to store the goods. he urged that people donate money to relief agencies rather than send food.
hunt visited privately friday morning with families of some of the 17 killed in the tornado,
the victims ranged in age from 7 to 67. two of the dead, john and wanda lewis, were found holding each other beneath a table, crushed by a collapsed ceiling at gates cleaners, where lewis was manager.
much of westbury mall was reduced to rubble by the tornado.
``to look at that building, it's hard to understand why more people were not killed,'' hunt said.
hunt also stopped at a school heavily damaged by the tornado. a hole in one outside wall exposed a caved-in classroom. because the tornado struck at 4:30 p.m., most of the classrooms were empty and only six children were injured.
school personnel and painters in the building were credited with helping protect about 30 youngsters in extended hours and kindergarten day care programs. some children were moved into a closet for safety.
``there were a lot of heroes, or more people would have been killed,'' said the governor.