
here is a chronology of events that began saturday in tiananmen square:
1 a.m. saturday (12 noon edt friday) _ tens of thousands of troops enter beijing from the east marching toward tiananmen square, china's symbolic political heart. military units also seen approaching from the west and the north.
2 a.m. _ the main body of troops is stopped several hundred yards east of the vast square by thousands of people.
2 a.m. to 9 a.m. _ troops straggle away from their positions near the square, walking in small groups followed by watchful residents.
12 noon _ two truckloads of people's armed police attack crowds outside beijing hotel east of the square and up to 30 people injured.
2 p.m. _ about 5,000 troops emerge from great hall of the people on the western side of the square and are surrounded by crowds. people's armed police fire tear gas and use clubs to beat protesters west of the square in a 30-minute attack.
4:30 p.m. _ stone- and bottle-throwing demonstrators skirmish with troops outside the great hall. troops swinging belts attack crowds. some soldiers injured by flying debris.
6 p.m. _ thousands of residents surround two troop convoys on a main highway in northeastern beijing.
7 p.m. _ national television repeats martial law regulations and warns people to stay off the streets and away from tiananmen square.
8:30 p.m. _ troops retreat into the great hall.
9 p.m. _ more than 20,000 people block a 26-truck convoy about 2{ miles east of the square and thousands of others converge on the square to protect students demanding demoncratic reforms.
crowds throw rocks at troop contingent 4{ miles west of tiananmen.
9 p.m.-10 p.m. _ troops hurl tear gas then open fire on the crowds.
12 midnight _ armored vehicles break through barricades and about 40 trucks carrying military personnel slowly advance toward the square from the west.
1 a.m. sunday. troops dash through flames caused by a burning-bus barricade at the major intersection of xidan west of the square. more people shot as troops fire at crowds.
a smaller group of about 1,000 military personnel enters the square from the east and shooting erupts.
2 a.m. _ thousands of troops arrive at the west side of the square and some of the riflemen open fire.
3:30 a.m. _ military units surround the square, trapping several thousand students inside.
4:30 a.m. _ armored personnel carriers enter the square. students are told by loudspeaker that troops will move in and clear the area.
5 a.m. _ demonstrators, many walking hand-in-hand, begin leaving the square, ending their three-week occupation.