
the image of a dour, shoeless english boy and his absent, carefree mother prompted julia baird and geoffrey giuliano to collaborate on a book.
the boy is the public image of young john lennon, baird's half-brother and giuliano's idol. but the neglected urchin and his live-it-up mother _ who was also baird's mother _ never existed, the authors say.
``that woman laughing, singing, dancing, saying goodbye to john, and john standing there alone crying `mummy, mummy!' that's not my brother, that's not my mother, that's not my children's grandmother,'' said baird, who recently spent three weeks in the united states promoting her book, a family portrait of lennon and his liverpool roots.
published in north america last fall, ``john lennon, my brother'' was co-authored by giuliano, a beatles aficionado who lives in this erie canal city about 25 miles north of buffalo.
the two-year, cross-atlantic collaboration came from two different motives. giuliano wanted to do a book about lennon. baird wanted to do a book about the ex-beatle's maligned mother, whose name also was julia.
the result is a little of both, a mishmash of anecdotes showing a moody but generally happy liverpool boy singing with his mother in a bathroom with good acoustics.
baird disagrees with other biographies which say that after his father decamped and julia turned her son over to her sister, mimi, lennon was a grim youth who felt abandoned by his mother.
``i didn't do it for john,'' said baird. ``i wanted to set the record straight about our mother, and that ties in with john. i feel my mother has been badly misrepresented in the press.''
baird, a 41-year-old teacher in cheshire, england, was born seven years after lennon to julia and her common-law second husband, john dykins. she and her younger sister, jacqui, grew up with their parents amid an extended family of aunts, uncles, cousins _ and big brother john.
the book tells of the sisters getting hauled out of the bathtub when teen-agers lennon, paul mccartney and george harrison drop by for bathroom jam sessions with julia. it tells of an alternately thoughtless and protective brother who leaves his step-sisters at the movies for hours while he goes on a date, who between songs at a beatles concert shouts for security guards to lift the dykins girls out of the front row, away from screaming fans threatening to storm the stage.
but mostly it tells of a mother and son who, while living apart, had a loving relationship.
the book got its start after baird watched a british television special in 1985 marking the fifth anniversary of lennon's murder. the show presented julia ``as an unfit mother, no mother at all,'' baird said.
baird complained and was urged to tell her story. she wrote an essay and arranged to publish it in liverpool. then she met giuliano, who was in liverpool to promote his first book, ``the beatles: a celebration.''
giuliano, 35, a self-proclaimed huckster, convinced baird to work with him on a book, which he pieced together from interviews with baird in england. while proofreading the text, baird sent a copy to mccartney. he sent his blessing, plus a bonus: a brief foreword for the book.
with a collection of rare early photos, the book is more a family album than a biography. giuliano's text reads like oral history, as if a british schoolteacher had spread the family scrapbook across the reader's knees to boast about her brother, the musician.
however, the book is a narrow view of lennon, a child's recollections of an aspiring brother. after julia was killed in a traffic accident in 1958, baird saw less and less of lennon, losing contact with him for years when he and wife yoko ono moved to the united states. the end of the book describes what baird calls lennon's desire to regain his lost liverpool roots, when she and her step-brother exchanged letters and phone calls during 1975-80.
baird has been accused of cashing in on her step-brother but insists she just wants to tell the family's story of lennon's early years.
``i could have cashed in when john was alive,'' baird said. ``when john died the tabloids in england were knocking on the door saying, `write your story, name your price.' we quickly showed them the door.''
also shown the door was albert goldman, whose sordid biography, ``the lives of john lennon,'' hit bookstores about the same time as baird's book. baird, who read goldman's scathing biography of elvis presley, said she turned down an interview with goldman, who brands lennon homosexual, anorexic and possibly a murderer.
``i had heard goldman was doing the book six years ago, and i knew what the tone would be,'' baird said. ``most people, including goldman, write books based on other books that have it all wrong.''
giuliano was harsher.
``goldman was in it for the money from day one,'' giuliano said. ``goldman knows the formula: the more sleaze, the more dough. so what's his motive? if he writes the sleaziest book he makes the most dough.''
baird herself wasn't blind to the business end of publishing. she agreed to change the title from ``my brother john'' to ``john lennon, my brother.''
the cover's look-alike photos of baird and lennon in granny specs also help, but she said she didn't don them to sell books. they're on the national health, britain's medical plan, and she and lennon inherited their mother's short-sightedness, baird said.
the book itself is a loving look through rose-colored specs of a brother whose art touched millions.
``it's not a major biography,'' giuliano said. ``this book is a little slice out of a big pie, out of a big life. it offers a lot of previously unknown details on lennon's early life. it's a sympathetic view, sure, but what's not to love?''