
lucille ball was mourned wednesday by the western new york hometown she left for hollywood more than half a century ago.
``it is a sad day for all of us. but i'm sure that feeling is shared by many people around the world,'' said nelson garifi, organizer of a homecoming for miss ball that was to have been held next month.
``she was always so full of life,'' said pauline lopus, who went to school with miss ball and had kept in touch with her. ``it seemed like she would just go on forever.''
the 77-year-old comedian died of a ruptured aorta, the main heart artery, at cedars-sinai medical center in los angeles, where she was recovering from emergency heart surgery last week.
the american heart association's jamestown office was deluged with calls from miss ball's fans who wanted to make a memorial donation, officials said.
``we just can't process as many memorials as we've received,'' said office manager nathan lax.
miss ball was born aug. 6, 1911, in this city of 40,000 people about 60 miles south of buffalo, the daughter of an electrician and a concert pianist. she grew up in nearby celoron, a rural hamlet on chautauqua lake.
friends said some of the characteristics of her most famous role _ the zany, excitable star of television's ``i love lucy'' _ were evident during her childhood.
mrs. lopus said miss ball dreamed of fame, either as a dramatic actress in new york city or as a dancing girl in musicals.
at age 15, she worked as a barker at a local amusement park, screaming pitches for popcorn and hot dogs until she lost her voice.
in high school, she starred in high school plays and made her first appearance before a large audience at the now-defunct palace theater here. as a model, she caught hollywood's eye and in 1933, she was off to hollywood.
although the comedian hadn't visited jamestown since 1956 and had no family there, she regularly donated money to charities, civic events and jamestown community college, said mayor steven carlson.
miss ball was to have received an honorary degree from the college at the homecoming scheduled for may 20.
residents had hung posters saying ``jamestown loves lucy'' in storefronts and house windows.
after she fell ill last week, residents signed the posters and sent them to her as a get-well greeting. they sent more than 150 posters with 10,000 signatures.
the honorary degree will be awarded posthumously, said garifi, who is community relations director at the college.
celoron had planned to rename a street in miss ball's honor during her visit, and still plans to rename it as lucy lane, said john goodell of celoron's historical society.
goodell said that when the group was formed about a year ago, ``we sent an invitation to lucille ball to be a member, and she sent back a check for $500 for a life membership.''