
the ira bombing that killed 10 men and blew apart a building at the royal marines music school outraged britons and stirred recriminations over safety standards at the school.
a huge explosion in a barracks staff room friday morning leveled the three-story building as bandsmen took a coffee break between practice sessions on the school's parade ground.
twelve of the 22 people injured were hospitalized, eight of them in serious condition, police said. they said nine of the dead were bandsmen and one other man was not immediately identified.
dozens of neighboring homes in the quiet southeastern english seaside town of deal were damaged.
although trainees at the school range in age from 16 to 20, col. john ware, principal director of music, said the slain bandsmen all were trained, adult musicians. they held military ranks but none had been trained as a fighting soldier.
the outlawed irish republican army, engaged in a 20-year-old campaign to drive the british from the province of northern ireland, claimed responsibility in a telephone call to ireland international, a dublin news agency.
residents of the area adjoining the marines school said friday that despite government calls for stepped-up public alertness against terrorists, security at the school had eased noticeably.
``anyone in deal will tell you how easy it is to get into the base,'' said fred verge, a 70-year-old army veteran.
local people laid wreaths and bouquets of flowers at the entrance to the barracks.
``there is a great sense of anger'' in the community, kent police chief constable paul condon said.
the royal marines music school is one of 30 military establishments in britain that use private security firms, defense ministry figures show.
unidentified defense sources quoted by the times newspaper today said the civilian guards were backed up by armed marines who patrolled regularly inside the perimeter.
defense secretary tom king promised a security review and said new measures had already been taken at the base. he did not elaborate.
martin o'neill, the opposition labor party's spokesman on defense, said on friday: ``serious questions must be asked about the penny-pinching policy of the ministry of defense, which may well put our armed services at dreadful risk.''
o'neill later told british broadcasting corp. television the ira was ``prepared to take out anybody. the cowardly nature of their attacks is such that every military establishment is under threat.''
he said private security firms were assigned to areas considered low risks for attacks.
``if we designate places as being low-risk categories, then it is likely they will be attacked, given the way that the ira is forced to operate,'' o'neill added.
``the big prizes are no longer available to them, so they're picking off the ones which they regard ... vulnerable.''
prime minister margaret thatcher received news of the bombing while aboard a jet over siberia en route from japan to moscow. she called it a ``deeply serious outrage.''
king visited the scene soon after the explosion.
``i know that the people who committed it, the godfathers who sent them, actually know in their hearts that it is not going to make any difference; that it is just killing for the sake of killing,'' he said.
the defense minister, anger clearly written on his face, said that rather than erode the will of the security forces, the attack ``redoubles their determination to ensure that terrorism cannot win.''
prime minister charles haughey of ireland condemned the attack and sent mrs. thatcher a message of sympathy at ``this outrage ... which has caused severe and tragic loss of life and many injuries.''
the mainly roman catholic ira claim gave no details of the operation, but said it was a response to a ``message of war'' delivered by mrs. thatcher when she visited northern ireland nine days ago.
it was an apparent reference to her speech praising the locally recruited ulster defense regiment as ``a very, very brave group of men'' who have lost 179 members in ira attacks since 1970.
the mainly protestant udr is regarded by many catholics as a sectarian force, and is at present under a cloud over allegations that some recruits leaked names, addresses and photos of ira suspects to protestant assassins.
british military installations are a frequent target of the ira campaign. friday's attack was the worst since july 1982 when 11 servicemen were fatally wounded in two bombings in central london.
the music school trains young recruits for the seven royal marines bands. up to 250 young men, most ages 16 to 20, undergo military and musical training there, working with older, professional bandsmen.