
a yacht built for adolf hitler and sunk with great fanfare to commemorate the ``voyage of the damned'' was mistakenly dropped on a delicate coral reef in a shallow shipping lane, officials said tuesday.
``they're going to have to move it,'' said coast guard spokeswoman veronica cady.
the 85-foot ostwind yacht was supposed to become an artificial reef in 250 feet of water about two miles off the coast.
it was sunk june 4, 50 years after the u.s. coast guard turned away the ss st. louis as its more than 900 jewish passengers were seeking refuge from the holocaust.
the sinking site was supposed to be near where the coast guard intercepted the st. louis, whose passengers also were turned away by cuba and forced to return to europe. most of the passengers later died in nazi concentration camps.
for unexplained reasons, the ostwind was pushed off a barge about a mile north of the site, and is resting in 25 feet of water on a living reef.
``it was truly an incredible, incredible historic event, and suddenly _ boom! _ somebody made a mistake,'' said mayor abe resnick, a holocaust survivor and a sponsor of the event.
federal and dade county officials who allowed resnick to sink the boat are upset about the result.
``they didn't even come close,'' complained susan markely, an administrator with dade's environmental department.
coast guard lt. al crespo said the yacht is balanced on a delicate living reef, threatening damage to coral and sponges. it's also close to an anchoring spot for freighters and other vessels heading to the port of miami and has been marked with a flashing buoy, he said.
``it's close enough that if a ship swings on its anchor, it could hit it,'' crespo said.
the army corps of engineers said the ostwind must be moved or cut to pieces by june 22. if it's not, the government will remove it and bill resnick.
resnick blames the mistake on a.m. daly jr., captain of the tug that towed the yacht to where it was sunk.
daly, however, said chris cadley, captain of a passenger boat that accompanied him, had agreed to lead him to the site.
cadley denied that, saying he only agreed to meet daly off the coast.
resnick said someone will have to pay.
``i think's that's going to end up being decided by attorneys,'' said ben mostkoff, the county's artificial reef director.
the ostwind was built at hitler's direction, although he rarely used it. after world war ii, the badly decayed boat wound up in the hands of a jacksonville marina owner.