
spencer tracy's acting technique was simply ``less is better,'' and that helped make him the screen's greatest actor. the tracy credo is recommended to future producers of academy award shows.
wednesday night's orgy of self-congratulation was dazzling, glamorous and all those familiar hollywood adjectives. also too much.
too many endless production numbers. too much forced conversation between couples. too many awards with meaning lost to the general public.
the use of ``couples, co-stars, compadres and companions,'' as presenters for the 61st academy awards at the shrine auditorium was clever but wearing.
the best oscar shows have been emceed by will rogers, bob hope, johnny carson and other funnymen who provided continuity as well as a leavening of pomposity.
the brightest moments of the 61st awards came from billy crystal, robin williams and bob hope, but they were all too brief.
tom selleck remarked that douglas fairbanks sr. handed out the first awards in 1929 in five minutes. the present awards could be staged in two hours instead of the 3 hours and 15 minutes they took wednesday night on abc-tv.
but the show will never be shorter. reason: the time is needed to sell all those 30-second adds at $375,000 per.
since the academy awards are a night of superlatives here are a few more:
the most heartfelt acceptance: dustin hoffman.
the most intelligent acceptance: jodie foster.
warmest reception: lucille ball and bob hope.
best looking legs: cyd charisse.
second-best looking legs: martin short.
worst desecration of an icon: snow white portrayed as a whining would-be starlet.
best comedy routine: billy crystal imitating yul brynner as babe ruth.
best walk-on music: ``the second time around'' for melanie griffith and don johnson.
least promising rock singer: rob lowe.
most overworked butt of jokes: vice president dan quayle by crystal, hope and williams (twice).
most prevalent fashion: strapless gowns.
seemingly endless number: ``oscar winners of tomorrow.''
most relentless double entendre: bo derek and dudley moore.
most questionable taste: kurt russell's ``proposal'' of marriage to goldie hawn.
most mentioned agent: michael ovitz of creative artists agency.
most recurrent dance routine: the rockettes-like line of kickers.
best exchange of banter: sean connery, michael caine and roger moore.
most welcomed elimination: singing of the nominees for best song.
most stunning beauty: michelle pfeiffer
worst reader of teleprompter: walter matthau.
editors: wednesday's ceremony was bob thomas' 45th academy awards.