
employees at a jewelry store huddled in the vault while the shop came down around them. a man in an apartment building stayed in his bathtub while the bathroom walls crumbled and fell.
those were among the stories people in this northern alabama city swapped on thursday as they assessed the damage from a tornado that whipped through the heart of the city in a flash, leaving at least 17 people dead and hundreds homeless.
``everybody was screaming and windows started breaking and the roof started to fall,'' recalled vincent davis, a fourth-grader at jones valley elementary school. ``the whole top story flew off. everybody wanted their mom.''
vincent was staying late at school wednesday when the twister hit shortly after 4:30 p.m. he was taken to a hospital with minor injuries; five of about 30 children in a kindergarten class also were reported hurt.
lynn culpepper was in his bathtub at the waterford square apartments, where at least a dozen buildings were destroyed. ``the next thing i knew, glass was breaking and i was rolling on the ground,'' he recalled.
``it was just black, and then there was this tumbling feeling with debris flying around everywhere. when i opened my eyes and looked around, there was just a pile of rubble where the apartments used to be.''
culpepper's head and arms were cut in the collapse.
manager bob husman of a golbro jewelry store ordered employees into the vault shortly before the roof and walls crashed down on him, 20 feet from the vault.
``in the jewelry business, the vault is the safest place,'' he said. ``i had structural steel on me but managed to crawl out. it was the worst kind of nightmare.''
the employees in the vault were dug out an hour after the collapse, shaken but not hurt.
rick snider was in the bakery aisle of a supermarket.
``part of the roof was coming off,'' he said. ``some ladies were crying, but it was quite calm. a checkout lady was hit with a cash register. people were shouting, `can i help?' and they were leading people to the light. there was no screaming or hysterical stuff. i came out and i couldn't believe the damage.''
for ed rolan, a medic, the devastation brought back memories of vietnam. rolan, who was driving home when the tornado hit, went right to work helping the stricken motorists around him.
``one lady was thrown from her car and i thought she was dead,'' he said. ``i came back by her later and saw she had changed positions. it took 30 minutes to get a stretcher to her.''
the enormity of the death and destruction ``sank in very quickly,'' rolan said. ``this is the closest to death i have been since vietnam.''