
strikes by tens of thousands of miners in this siberian coal region spread to four more of the soviet union's coal fields, tass reported today.
the official news agency said coal miners in vorkuta in the far north, the don river city of rostov in southwestern russia and the ukrainian industrial center of dnepropetrovsk walked out wednesday.
miners in the karaganda region in soviet central asia today refused to work, tass said. by evening, 14 mines in the region, home of the country's third-largest coal fields, were reported at a standstill.
tass said their demands were similar to those of striking miners in the donetsk and kuznetsk coal basins, who are seeking greater local control over their industries and better wages and living conditions.
kuznetsk, in western siberia, and donetsk, in the ukraine, are the country's two leading coal basins and the strikes amount to the country's worst labor unrest since the 1920s. novokuznetsk is a major city in the kuznetsk region, where the strikes began 10 days ago.
the government has acknowledged that living and working conditions for miners in the regions are abysmal and has made general pledges of improvements.
tass reported wednesday that some miners in siberia had returned to work after the government made pay concessions.
the government also has promised to send extra meat, butter, sugar, tea, leather shoes, furniture and cars to relieve shortages in the region, the communist youth league newspaper komsomolskaya pravda said today.
but the newspaper and tass reported more disturbances in the ukraine. komsomolskaya pravda quoted a communist official in the donetsk city of makeyevka as saying, ``the scale of the strike is growing. practically all the coal enterprises of the city have stopped work.''
miners in vorkuta, rostov and dnepropetrovsk all walked off the job on wednesday, tass said.
in vorkuta, strikers sent a letter to the kremlin asking for an ``urgent resolution of the sharp economic and social problems of the coal sector, and also specific problems of workers of the far north,'' tass said.
in rostov, miners' economic demands included extra pay for evening and night shifts, longer vacations and an increase in the price of coal to world market prices, the news agency reported.
in dnepropetrovsk, which is 150 miles from donetsk, workers' demands mirrored those of donetsk and kuznetsk miners.
in karaganda, strikers said they walked out to protest incomplete news accounts of miners' demands in the kuznetsk strikes, according to tass.
president mikhail s. gorbachev said wednesday the strikes could imperil his reforms and that there were reports of railway workers being urged to strike.
he said that if labor trouble spreads, ``we may have to take such extreme measures that it will hurt what we've been doing'' to overhaul the economy through greater attention to free-market mechanisms.
he did not elaborate.
strikes are rare in the soviet union and were ended by force before gorbachev gained power in march 1985.
tass today said that the kuznetsk strike had reached ``a turning point,'' with nine out of 11 mining centers back at work.
it was not known how many more employees were back on the job today. on wednesday, tass said that 24,000 strikers in kuznetsk were back at work and 150,000 remained on strike.
state television said wednesday that the strike in the donetsk basin had spread to 70 of its 120 mines, more than triple the previous number, and that mine construction workers had joined.
in a report from the donetsk city of yenakiyevo, television said steel and coke-chemical plants were ``on the verge of a stoppage'' for lack of coal.
earlier reports in the official press had said operations at steel and power plants were affected by short supplies of coal and coke.
gorbachev told the national legislature wednesday that the strikes had deprived the nation of more than 1 million tons of coal.
the government has agreed to most miner demands, including those on pensions and overtime, gorbachev said. but he said that settling some longer-term issues would take up to a month.
tass outlined a concessions package that includes bonus pay to night shifts and for men using jackhammers.
strikers also have complained about poor housing and shortages of consumer goods and food, and the government has made general pledges of improvements in those areas.