
as a young girl in western new york, lucille ball hawked hot dogs and popcorn at an amusement park as she dreamed of starring in movies, hometown friends recalled.
``she always talked about being a star,'' said pauline lopus, who went to school with miss ball and had kept in touch with her.
miss ball, born 60 miles south of buffalo in jamestown on aug. 6, 1911, grew up in nearby celoron, a rural hamlet on chautauqua lake.
mrs. lopus remembered the sitcom star on wednesday as ``daring in many ways.''
``she tried to get me to run off (to broadway),'' mrs. lopus added. ``but i didn't have the nerve.''
at 15, miss ball worked as a barker at the amusement park, screaming for people to buy popcorn and hot dogs until she lost her voice.
later, she starred in high school plays and got her start in front of a large audience on the vaudeville stage at the defunct palace theater in jamestown.
although miss ball hadn't visited jamestown since 1956 and had no family there, she stayed in touch with friends.
``even though she was a big star, she was still just lucy to us,'' said irene rosseti of celoron.
mrs. rosseti said miss ball recently sent her and her husband a letter on their 50th wedding anniversary.
miss ball regularly donated money to charities, civic events and jamestown community college, said jamestown mayor steven carlson.
on may 20, miss ball was to receive an honorary degree from the college and had planned to return to jamestown, now a city of about 40,000.
residents had put up posters saying ``jamestown loves lucy'' in storefronts and home windows. after miss ball suffered a heart attack last week, residents decided to sign the posters and send them to her as a get-well greeting. more than 150 posters were sent with 10,000 signatures.
the 77-year-old comedian died wednesday of a ruptured aorta, the main heart artery, at cedars-sinai medical center in los angeles, where she was recovering from last week's emergency heart surgery.
``it is a sad day for all of us,'' said nelson garifi, an organizer of the welcoming event. ``but i'm sure that feeling is shared by many people around the world.''
garifi, community relations director for the community college, said the honorary degree will be awarded posthumously.
future generations in celoron will have a reminder of their famous resident every time they drive or walk down the street where she grew up _ it will be renamed lucy lane.
village officials had planned formal ceremonies renaming the street when she was due in the area next month.
``but it will happen anyway,'' john goodell of the village's historical society said wednesday.
when the society was formed about a year ago, goodell said: ``we sent an invitation to lucille ball to be a member, and she sent back a check for $500 for a life membership.
``it was a check written in a very bold hand with a signature about a half inch high.''