
here is a look at key events in the student pro-democracy movement, the government crackdown and the fighting between rival army factions:
april 15 _ former communist party chief hu yaobang dies. beijing university students put up posters praising him and indirectly criticizing opponents who forced his resignation after student demonstrations in 1986-87.
april 18 _ thousands of students march in beijing and shanghai, expressing dissatisfaction with the government and shouting ``long live hu yaobang! long live democracy!'' about 1,000 stage a sit-in at the great hall of the people to demand greater democracy, a free press, and more money for education.
april 24 _ students begin boycott of university classes.
april 27 _ in the largest to date of a continuing series of protests, more than 150,000 students, with wide support from people on the street, surge past police lines and fill tiananmen square, chanting slogans for democracy and freedom.
april 29 _ officials meet with student leaders, but independent student groups are not satisfied and continue a class boycott at 41 universities.
may 4 _ about 100,000 students and supporters march on tiananmen square to celebrate the 70th anniversary of china's first student movement. demonstrations are held in shanghai, nanjing and other cities. about 300 journalists protest outside the official xinhua news agency.
may 13 _ about 2,000 students begin a hunger strike in tiananmen square.
may 14 _ thousands flock to the square to back the students. the number fasting rises to 3,000.
may 15 _ the government deadline for students to leave the square passes. soviet president mikhail s. gorbachev's welcoming ceremony planned near the square must be moved to the airport.
may 16 _ hundreds of thousands occupy the square. journalists and intellectuals join the protest.
may 17 _ zhao pleas for students to leave. students reject his appeal and hold marches that generate 1 million supporters in beijing.
may 18 _ about 1 million people, including many workers, again take to the streets to show their support for the hunger strikers. li peng issues a stern lecture to student leaders and refuses to discuss their demands.
may 19 _ a tearful zhao visits weakened hunger strikers. li also visits the students briefly. the students later decide to end the hunger strike.
may 20 _ martial law is declared in parts of beijing. zhao reportedly resigns after failing to persuade li and other hardliners to compromise. students resume their hunger strike, then abandon it, saying they will need their strength for the struggle ahead.
may 21 _ students claim to reject an order by li peng to leave tiananman square or face military action. defying martial law, hundreds of thousands of people remain in the square or block intersections to prevent troops from reaching it.
may 22 _ hundreds of thousands of people again block major roads and senior military leaders say they are resisting orders to order their troops on the protesters. at least one military convoy is reported to withdraw.
may 23 _ one million people take to the streets to demonstrate for democracy.
may 25 _ li makes his first appearance since declaring martial law. state-run radio says 27 of 29 provinces support martial law, and military units announce they support martial law.
may 26 _ sources say zhao and another leading liberal, wan li, head of the legislature, are under house arrest.
may 27 _ beijing student leaders propose students end their occupation of tiananmen square. non-beijing students resist and the sit-in continues.
may 28 _ about 80,000 people, many students from outside the capital, stage a demonstration, but unlike in past rallies few workers participate.
may 30 _ students unveil their ``goddess of democracy,'' a replica of the statue of liberty, on the square. the government calls it an insult to the nation. students rally outside police headquarters to protest the detention of three members of an independent labor union.
may 31 _ the first of several pro-government rallies is staged by farmers and workers in beijing suburbs. the participants, ordered to show up, show little enthusiasm.
june 1 _ the beijing municipal government warns foreign journalists that under martial law they must receive approval for all press coverage. coverage of the demonstrations is banned.
june 2 _ more than 1,000 troops appear outside the railway station in a show of force.
june 3-4 _ tens of thousands of troops make several attempts to move on the square but are driven back by crowds of hundreds of thousands of people supporting the students. riot squads beat and fire tear gas at demonstrators. a final push is made the evening of june 3, and soldiers begin firing on crowds. troops surround and enter the square june 4 in the early morning hours and thousands of protesters flee. hundreds are killed and thousands wounded.
june 5 _ soldiers in beijing randomly shoot at unarmed civilians. army reinforces positions in city center. reports spread of a split in the army and a battle between military factions. demonstraters in shanghai, nanjing and other major chinese cities protest the slaughter in beijing. u.s. announces suspension of all military sales and visits of chinese military leaders, but stops short of severing diplomatic ties.
june 6 _ armies loyal to rival factions trade fire. soldiers continue firing into crowds around beijing. anti-government demonstrations spread to shanghai, nanjing, chengdu, shenyang and other cities. other nations urge their citizens to leave beijing.