
here is a chronology of hurricane hugo's destructive path across the caribbean into south carolina:
sept. 11 _ forecasters monitor new tropical wave forming off west africa, southwest of the cape verde islands.
sept. 12 _ storm reaches the 39 mph tropical storm threshold and is named hugo.
sept. 13 _ hugo develops into a hurricane as winds reach 74 mph. storm is about 1,000 miles east of the lesser antilles island chain.
sept. 14 _ winds increase to 115 mph; storm is 650 miles east of lesser antilles.
sept. 15 _ winds reach 150 mph. storm, designated a category 4 hurricane, is considered ``extremely dangerous.'' located 340 east miles of french territorial island of guadeloupe.
sept. 16 _ hugo bears down on guadeloupe and dominica with winds reaching 140 mph.
sept. 17 _ eye of hugo is directly over guadeloupe. guadeloupe is devasted by winds measuring up to 150 mph. five people are reported killed, 84 injured and more than 15,000 homeless on the island of 340,000 people. roofs were torn off, power lines downed and crops damaged.
sept. 17 _ hugo hits british island of montserrat. nine people are killed and hundreds of buildings are flattened. the british government says nearly all of the 12,000 island residents are homeless.
sept. 17 _ on antigua, two people are killed and there is widespread wind and rain damage. island hotels report water and wind damage.
sept. 17 _ no casualties are reported on the island of st. kitts, but houses are damaged and communications nearly severed.
sept. 17 _ on the british virgin islands, trees are uprooted and power and communications knocked out. on the resort island of tortola, residents say there are numerous injuries and scores of homes destroyed.
in the u.s. virgin islands, the popular tourist islands of st. croix and st. thomas are hard hit. at least one person is reported killed on st. croix. early reports say 97 percent of the buildings were damaged or destroyed on st. croix, population 53,000. sailboats were blown out of the water and thrown up to 150 feet on shore in st. thomas. some waterfront businesses disappeared. on st. croix, widespread looting is reported, including raids by machete-wielding gangs. some reports say prisoners escaped from jail and were roaming free and national guardsman and police were joining in the looting.
sept. 18 (daybreak) _ hugo crosses the northeast corner of puerto rico. damage is estimated at hundreds of millions of dollars and homes of at least 50,000 people were destroyed or damaged. at least three people are killed. national guardsmen were aiding the cleanup and trying to stop widespread looting. the pentagon said some of its facilities, including u.s. naval station at roosevelts roads in puerto rico, were heavily damaged.
sept. 19 _ on the bahamas, islanders boarded up homes and stocked up as hugo moved westward. the storm brushes past the islands, with minimal damage, moving on a course parallel to the islands.
sept. 20 _ headed toward the southeast coast of the united states, hugo has winds of 105-125 mph.
sept. 21 _ hugo picks up speed and power. winds reach 135 mph. hurricane is again classified as a category 4 hurricane, capable of extreme damage.
sept. 21 (midnight) _ hugo crashes into charleston, s.c., with winds of 135 mph, leveling buildings and flooding streets. in addition to flooding, fires from natural gas leaks erupt in charleston. several other coastal communities also suffer heavy damage. ten people in the carolinas are killed.
sept. 22 _ the hurricane, with steadily diminishing winds, continues to move inland and is downgraded to a tropical storm. further weakening is expected as it moves north with its load of heavy rain.
sept. 22 _ hugo was downgraded to a tropical storm at 6 a.m. friday. twelve hours later it had all but lost the characteristics of a tropical storm and was weakening, although the weather system featured maximum sustained winds of 40 mph and torrential rains. its last location was just west of pittsburgh, pa., at latitude 40.5 degrees north and longitude 81 degrees west. officials said no further tracking would be done.