
prime minister margaret thatcher said monday the irish republican army members who blew up the royal marines school of music and killed 10 bandsmen last week are ``monsters'' who will be found and punished.
``the young men whom we lost were murdered by common murderers who must be found and brought to justice and put behind bars for a very long time,'' she said following a tour of the school's wrecked barracks in deal, southeast england.
``we lost 10 remarkable musicians, not fighting men, just because some people try to bomb others out of their democratic views,'' she said. ``they are very evil people, absolute monsters.''
gerry adams, president of sinn fein, the legal political arm of the ira, issued a statement disputing mrs. thatcher's remarks, saying ``she knows in her heart of hearts the real nature of the conflict, its cause and the remedy.''
the ira is fighting to end british rule in northern ireland and unite the predominantly protestant province with the roman catholic republic of ireland.
``we want an end to all violent deaths arising out of the present relationship between our two countries,'' adams said. ``we want a new peaceful relationship based on an acceptance and respect for our rights as a sovereign nation.''
after visiting some of the 11 injured bandsmen still in the hospital, mrs. thatcher pledged: ``the hunt for the bombers will be pursued with all possible speed, vigor and dedication.''
raymond kendall, the secretary-general of the international police organization interpol, pledged the organization's full support in the hunt for those who blew up the school.
``i hope we will have a part to play in finding them,'' said kendall after opening the international police exhibition and conference in london.
``they are criminals of the worst sort and should be dealt with as such.''
before landing in deal, mrs. thatcher's helicopter flew over the rubble that had been the band's recreation center.
the ira claimed responsibility for the explosion, and police said they are looking for three men with irish accents who rented a house overlooking the barracks.