
margaret thatcher set the example of what a woman could achieve in british society, but her critics say she did little else to help women along.
for some, it was enough that her political career reached the heights.
one woman wrote to the independent newspaper last week that her 7-year-old daughter wondered what title mrs. thatcher's successor would hold, since ``he couldn't be called prime minister, that's a girl's name.''
emma nicholson, a conservative party lawmaker, said it was once unthinkable that a woman would ever be a british prime minister. ``she has broken the mold once and forever,'' ms. nicholson said in an interview.
mrs. thatcher, who trained as a chemist before studying law, said she viewed herself as prime minister, not as a woman. she believed the battle for women's rights had been largely won and was no believer in feminism.
``what has it ever done for me?'' she once asked.
mrs. thatcher, who stepped down on thursday, urged women to get involved in politics, but did little to pull them up the ladder.
several female lawmakers were appointed to junior executive posts in various ministries, but the only woman to serve in a thatcher cabinet was baroness young, leader of the house of lords from 1981 to 1983.
``the truth is that although mrs. thatcher is a woman, she doesn't believe in the advancement of women,'' clare short, a labor party lawmaker, said last month.
edwina currie, a former junior health minister, said any other prime minister would have had several women in and out of the cabinet.
``it's margaret's fault that the only people standing (to succeed her) wear trousers,'' mrs. currie said last week. trree men are vying to succeed her as conservative party leader and thus prime minister in a vote by party lawmakers set for tuesday.
traditional male attitudes remain strong in britain, from the upper-crust, all-male clubs of london to the topless women pictured daily in the tabloid press.
women are paid less than men and are poorly represented in management jobs and in parliament.
however, campaigners for women rights say there are encouraging signs at the grassroots.
``the critical mass of women have entered middle management in government and business,'' said lesley abdela, a founding member of the 300 group.
the group seeks equal representation for women in the 650-seat house of commons, which now has 43 female members.
women represented 43 percent of the british labor force in 1988, compared with 40 percent in 1979 when mrs. thatcher became prime minister. britain has a higher proportion of working women than other european community countries.
though mrs. thatcher never made a priority of women's issues, she did introduce some helpful legislation: tax concessions for workplace nurseries; independent taxation for married women; and legislation to compel absent fathers to pay child benefits.
but as prime minister, she angered feminists by often emphasizing women's traditional roles of homemakers and care-givers.
angela rumbold, the conservative party's minister for women's issues, contends that an ``enormous amount'' has been done for women during the thatcher years.
``i'm not sure what she could have gone beyond promoting people who were there just because they were women,'' she said in an interview. ``margaret thatcher is a great meritocrat. she believes in getting people to succeed on their merits.''
jo hawkins of the 300 group, which is seeking equal numbers of women in the house of commons, believes mrs. thatcher's extraordinary abilities made it difficult for her to understand the needs of the average woman.
``she would say that anybody can do it, just stick to your principles and get up and do it,'' ms. hawkins said. ``i think because of her character, her personality and her amazing self-confidence, she isn't aware of how the normal person struggles.''