
planes loaded with food, medicine and tents are converging on earthquake-stricken iran from around the world, among them the first private american relief mission to the country in more than a decade.
authorities now are faced with the difficult task of getting supplies into the affected areas. more than 60 aftershocks jolted the quake zone in northwestern iran on sunday, triggering landslides along one key relief route.
tehran radio said sunday that 68 relief aircraft had landed at tehran's mehrabad airport during a 24-hour period. among them was a plane carrying medicine and other supplies from the united states.
another plane carrying u.s. government aid was due today.
the shipment that arrived sunday was the first of its kind to be accepted by iran since the hostage crisis of 1979-80, when 52 americans were held at the u.s. embassy in tehran.
two countries that also have suffered devastating earthquakes in recent years, the soviet union and mexico, were among those sending assistance to help victims of thursday's quake.
leaders of iran's arab neighbors, including iraq, which waged an eight-year war with iran, issued statements of sympathy and support.
pope john paul ii called on the international community to help earthquake victims, asking for ``a real and generous demonstration of solidarity with our brothers. let us pray that their suffering is alleviated.''
the vatican was among the many international donors.
eleven planes from west germany ferried in 145 tons of supplies plus a field hospital with two medical teams. nine flights arrived from turkey. the spanish red cross sent medicines and food; india sent medicine. the austrian red cross shipped tents, blankets and medicine.
bernard kouchner, the french secretary of state for humanitarian action, arrived in iran on sunday to coordinate french assistance and evaluate future needs, radio france inter said. the french government has sent a civil defense team of 195 people and 18 search dogs along with at least 24 tons of equipment. the saudi-based 46-member organization of the islamic conference, an umbrella organization for the world's estimated one billion moslems, issued an ``urgent appeal to the international community and especially islamic countries and organizations to hasten with emergency aid for the iranians ...''
americares, a private u.s. relief organization based in new canaan, conn., flew in the 42 tons pounds of supplies that arrived sunday.
``to be on the ground here in tehran is a very special feeeling for us,'' said stephen m. johnson, president of americares.
a spokeswoman for the u.s. agency for international development said a red cross charter flight carrying $225,000 worth of supplies donated by the u.s. government would arrive in tehran this morning.
iran is believed to have influence with the shiite moslem extremists holding 16 western hostages, including six americans, in lebanon. the longest-held is terry anderson, chief middle east correspondent of the associated press. he was kidnapped march 16, 1985.
the soviet union sent in medical teams and supplies from soviet republics bordering iran. more than 200 medical personnel arrived from the soviet union, which also sent medical supplies, trucks, trailers, ambulances, cranes, buses and water tankers.
the december 1988 earthquake in soviet armenia left at least 25,000 people dead. mexico, which lost at least 10,000 people in a 1985 earthquake, is sending food, medical supplies and blankets, officials said sunday.
in lebanon, the iranian-backed hezbollah, or party of god, said its members were donating 10 percent of their salaries to help the victims. that would amount to about $500,000, according to hezbollah sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity.