
the u.n. security council today overwhelmingly approved sweeping trade and military sanctions against iraq, including a ban on oil purchases, to punish baghdad for invading kuwait.
the vote was 13-0, with two abstentions by cuba and yemen on the 15-member council, which adopted the sanctions resolution proposed by the united states. it said iraq had launched an armed attack against kuwait and usurped the authority of kuwait's legitimate government.
the sanctions were intended to force iraq to withdraw its troops from kuwait and the resolution bans ``the import into their territories of all commodities and products originating in iraq or kuwait and exported there from after the date of this resolution.''
president bush praised the decision and called for ``full and total implementation of these sanctions, ruling out nothing at all.''
he told reporters at the white house: ``the will of nations around the world will be to enforce these sanctions.''
it was the third time in its 45-year existence that the world body had voted sanctions against a member state. the last time was 1967 when the security council voted similar, comprehensive sanctions against the white minority government of rhodesia.
an arms embargo against south africa still is in effect.
the sanctions are legally binding for all member nations, although past council resolutions have often been ignored or flouted. the united nations has no enforcement mechanism but later could call on members to take military action against iraq or impose a blockade.
the vote followed similar sanctions imposed on iraq by much of the west, including the united states, japan and the european community. the soviet union and china said they would halt arms shipments to iraq.
in a statement carried by the iraqi news agency on sunday, the iraqi-installed military government of kuwait warned other nations not to take ``punishing measures'' against it or iraq. the provisional government said countries ``have to remember they have interests and citizens in kuwait.''
the u.n. role in the iraq-kuwait crisis assumed increasing importance after divided arab nations canceled a weekend emergency summit on the invasion.
in an emergency session just hours after thursday's invasion, the security council condemned iraq's invasion, demanded immediate and unconditional troop withdrawal, and called for negotiations between iraq and kuwait.
the council threatened to impose sanctions if iraq did not comply.
the council includes the five permanent members with veto power _ the united states, britain, china, france and the soviet union. the 10 non-permanent members are: canada, colombia, cuba, ethiopia, finland, ivory coast, malaysia, romania, yemen and zaire.