
after years of delay and a last-minute snag, the hubble space telescope was freed from the shuttle discovery on wednesday and, glinting in the sunlight, drifted into orbit on its 15-year search for new worlds.
mission specialist steven hawley released hubble from the end of the shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm after a delay in getting one of the telescope's solar wings unfurled.
``the first of nasa's great observatories is now on station at 330 nautical miles above the earth,'' mission control's jeffrey carr said.
``the telescope really looked great as we flew away from it, and we sure hope it does good work,'' discovery commander loren j. shriver said later.
the $1.5 billion telescope was released at 3:38 p.m. edt as the shuttle entered its 20th orbit of earth, nearly two hours and one orbit later than planned. the shuttle then backed away.
``thank you very much for the ride,'' said mike harrington, director of orbital verifications at goddard space flight center in greenbelt, md.
mission specialists bruce mccandless and kathryn sullivan had been in the shuttle's airlock, ready to walk inspace to free the solar panel. that proved to be unnecessary.
``close but no cigar, but better for the hubble that it went the way it did,'' sullivan said. she and mccandless had trained for nearly five years to make such a rescue mission.
the first solar array unreeled from its mast at midday wednesday as the shuttle passed 380 statute miles, or 330 nautical miles, above south america's eastern coast. it started providing power to the telescope's batteries, which otherwise had only eight hours of charge.
deployment of the starboard panel, however, was more troublesome. it wouldn't budge when latches were first released, then moved about a fifth of its 39-foot length, and stopped again. a third attempt rolled the panel out all the way.
``houston, we see motion,'' commander loren j. shriver reported.
hawley began the long process of releasing hubble shortly after 7 a.m. edt when he grasped it with discovery's 50-foot-long mechanical arm and carefully hoisted the 12{-ton telescope high above the shuttle.
hubble was taken off shuttle electrical power just before it was lifted out of the cargo bay and was operating on its own nickel-hydrogen batteries.
``at one day, seven minutes into the flight of discovery, hubble is now on its own internal power,'' carr said. ``the game has begun. the race is on. the clock is ticking.''
worries that the telescope's instruments would be starved for electricity eased after the first solar panel was stretched out.
television cameras aboard discovery showed the first array as it was pulled from its reel slowly but steadily, the sun reflecting off the gold-colored panel and silvery telescope.
discovery was 380 statute miles above earth, 70 miles higher than any shuttle has ever flown. the orbit was dictated by the need to put the telescope above the earth's distorting atmosphere.
discovery's five astronauts were awed by the view.
``i'd like to pass on the quote of the day from the on-board astronomer something to the effect that the big marble sure looks far away today,'' shriver said of hawley.
astronomers have waited seven years for hubble to take its place in space. the telescope originally was scheduled for launch in 1983, but technical problems and the challenger explosion pushed it back.
the mission was delayed another two weeks when a faulty power unit on discovery forced the national aeronautics and space administration to halt the first launch attempt four minutes before april 10's scheduled liftoff.
on tuesday, discovery finally blasted into space, transporting hubble out of this world and in search of others.
the telescope's 10-foot aperture door is to be opened friday, exposing the finely polished 94.5-inch mirror to starlight. discovery was following hubble in case the door does not open properly. if a problem develops, mccandless and sullivan will be prepared once again to walk in space.
fred wojtalik, hubble project manager, said the telescope would be tested thursday for its ability to maneuever before the aperture door is opened.
``we want to be in full control so we don't ever endanger the hubble by putting the aperture door close to the sunlight,'' he said.
the telescope cannot focus into the sun because of the sensitivity of its five instruments.
if all goes well, the crew will land sunday at edwards air force base, calif.
nasa expects to release its first image from the telescope _ of an open star cluster in the constellation carina _ on tuesday. data will follow in a month or two.
astronomers hope to look back to almost the beginning of the time, studying stars and galaxies so distant their light has been traveling to earth for 14 billion years. they expect to determine precisely how and when the universe was formed, currently estimated at 15 billion years ago.
the telescope is named for the late american astronomer edwin p. hubble, who discovered during the 1920s that the universe was expanding. he also was responsible for helping to form the big bang theory of creation.