
here is a brief chronology in the dispute between iraq and kuwait over oil production and their common border.
july 17 _ iraqi president saddam hussein accuses kuwait and the united arab emirates of flooding the oil market and driving prices down, and that the move cost iraq $14 billion in lost oil revenue. he further charges that arab states in the persian gulf are conspiring with the united states and israel to weaken iraq's economy and undermine its military buildup.
july 18 _ iraq accuses kuwait of stealing $2.4 billion worth of oil from wells along the disputed border with iraq and of seeking to wreck iraq's economy by overproducing oil and thus pushing down prices.
july 20 _ kuwaiti officials suggest iraq's sudden outburst of belligerence is aimed at getting its creditors _ including kuwait _ to write off billions of dollars in debts from the 1980-88 iran-iraq war.
july 24 _ the u.s. defense department announces that u.s. navy warships and aircraft are holding a ``short-notice exercise'' in the persian gulf with the united arab emirates, about 600 miles southeast of the kuwait-iraqi border. kuwait reinstates a state of alert it declared july 16 and canceled after three days of tension between the two oil-producing countries.
july 25 _ the iraqi government in baghdad says that it will not be intimidated by u.s. pressure in its oil dispute with neighboring kuwait, and saddams summons the u.s. ambassador for talks. president hosni mubarak of egypt says iraq and kuwait plan to meet in saudi arabia in an effort to resolve their dispute.
july 26 _ opec ministers in geneva agree to halt overproduction in hopes of pushing up the price of crude oil. kuwait and the united arab emirates pledge to abide by the agreement. analysts say saddam clearly influenced the outcome of the meetings.
july 31 _ kuwaiti and iraqi delegations meet in jiddah, saudi arabia, to negotiate the oil and border dispute. diplomats say iraq has massed 100,000 troops on kuwait's border, more than triple the number originally estimated. that number dwarfs the kuwaiti army, which has a total of about 20,000 troops.
aug. 1 _ iraq pulls out of talks on the 2-week-old border, oil and money dispute with kuwait shortly before it sends its forces to invade the oil-rich sheikdom.
aug. 2 _ iraq's powerful army overruns kuwait before dawn with tank-led troops quickly seized the ruler's palace and other government buildings.