
prime minister benazir bhutto on thursday accused india of waging ``genocide'' in secession-minded kashmir and of trying to start a war with pakistan to deflect attention.
her remarks raised tensions further between india and pakistan, which have been feuding over indian-controlled kashmir. the two countries, which have fought wars over the area in 1949 and 1965, have in recent weeks again built up their military forces near the common border.
``india is indulging in genocide,'' ms. bhutto said at a news conference thursday after returning from a weeklong tour of eight moslem countries in the middle east and north africa.
``islamic scholars are being killed and innocent people are being slaughtered. this is deplorable,'' said the prime minister.
she was referring to the assassination of maulvi mohammad farooq, the top moslem cleric in indian kashmir. during his funeral procession monday, indian forces shot to death 58 people.
ms. bhutto returned late wednesday from visits to iran, turkey, syria, jordan, north yemen, egypt, libya and tunisia, a high-profile diplomatic offensive to drum up support for pakistan's stand on the kashmir issue.
hindu-dominated india accuses pakistan of arming and training kashmiri militants fighting for secession of jammu-kashmir, india's only state with a moslem majority. pakistan, which is dominated by moslems, denies the indian charge.
since the indian government ordered a crackdown on the militants in late january, more than 400 people have been killed.
during her trip abroad, ms. bhutto said all her host countries agreed that india and pakistan needed to find a lasting political settlement of the 43-year-old dispute.
however, she added, ``if subjected to aggression, we would have the full support of the arab islamic nations. pakistan, i was assured, would never be left alone.''
``we believe the threats to peace are grave,'' she said. ``we cannot rule out the possibility of an armed conflict, but we do not believe war is inevitable,'' she told reporters.
ms. bhutto said she opposes an independent kashmir. she said it was not envisioned when india and pakistan gained independence in a 1947 partition.
the prime minister again called for talks between pakistan and india. she also said a neutral body should look into the charges made by both sides.
india has already rejected both suggestions.