
mcdonald's hamburgers, fries and golden arches came to china on monday when the fast-food chain opened its first restaurant in a nation famed for its distinctive cuisine.
hundreds of chinese waited for hours outside the restaurant in shenzhen, an economic boom town near hong kong, for their first taste of a mcdonald's hamburger, fries or shake.
``i travelled for four hours from a village to get here,'' said huang rongti, 70, who has lost most of her teeth because of age. ``you think hamburgers are too challenging for my age?''
later, after purchasing her first big mac, she inspected it carefully before taking a bite.
``it tastes good, i like it,'' she announced before slowly eating the rest.
the opening of a u.s. fast-food restaurant in china, where cooking has long been considered a culinary art, may seem odd to gourmets. it is estimated there are more than 5,000 different chinese dishes.
in canton, 125 miles northwest of shenzhen, chefs specialize in some of the more exotic chinese dishes, such as cat stew, bear paws, chicken feet and a famed snake dish - ``dragon and tiger locked in battle'' - made from three kinds of poisonous snakes stewed with leopard meat, and garnished with 20 spices, lemon leaves and chrysanthemum petals.
however, many chinese, who earn an average $32 a month, are still unable to afford fancy meals at restaurants.
in shenzhen, a chinese special economic zone where foreign investors have built factories, salaries are higher and workers earn an average of $53 a month.
at the restaurant, a big mac costs $1.14, a bag of fries 48 cents and a shake 74 cents.
another u.s. fast food outlet, kentucky fried chicken, opened a restaurant in beijing in 1987, and it now has four outlets there. mcdonald's hopes to open a restaurant in beijing later.
although kentucky fried chicken has become popular, the average chinese still regards a meal there as a treat, rather than a convenience, and mcdonald's could face the same problems.
the 500-seat mcdonald's restaurant in a three-story building is operated by mcdonald's restaurant shenzhen ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of mcdonald's hong kong. mcdonald's hong kong is a 50-50 joint venture with mcdonald's in the united states.
it is managed by a chinese national, chen tikang, and his son, chen yin, who is the restaurant manager. the younger chen returned recently from a course at mcdonald's hamburger university in oak brook, ill.
most of the ingredients used at the restaurant are now imported from hong kong. but mcdonald's executives hope eventually to get their supplies of beef and potatoes from china.
daniel ng, chairman of mcdonald's restaurant shenzhen ltd., said it took two years to prepare for the restaurant's opening and his ambition now is to serve 10 million burgers a year.
last month, when mcdonald's advertized for 240 staffers for the restaurant, it received applications from more than 9,000 persons, including college graduates, officials said.
``i feel i have a better job prospect working here, and it pays better,'' said henry he, 25, who has a master's degree in garment and textile. he is an assistant manager at the restaurant.
a waiter at the restaurant can earn 53 cents an hour.
a factory worker, who waited several hours before she was able to purchase her hamburger, said she liked it because of its ``sweet taste'' - the result of tomato ketchup, which is not commonly used in traditional chinese cooking.