
the death toll from last week's flash floods mounted to 21 today when a body was found in the ohio river, and authorities said there was little hope for the 14 people still listed as missing.
``it's just been too long. i don't think there's anybody alive out there. you can't swim out there that long in the ohio river,'' said chuck vogt, belmont county coroner's investigator.
the search for the missing was suspended briefly this morning when a thunderstorm rolled through the area. heavy rain fell for about 45 minutes, swelling wegee creek, one of two creeks that overflowed in thursday night's flash flood.
by midmorning, the muddy creek was nearly crossing a road about three miles upstream from where the floods inflicted the most damage. lt. dean irvin of the ohio army national guard said there were no immediate reports of additional property damage.
the body found this morning was in the ohio river near moundsville, w.va., about 10 miles south of shadyside, according to chuck vogt, belmont county coroner's investigator.
the number of names on the list of missing dropped from 18 to 14 with the identities of three victims and a call by one person alerting authorities that she was safe, vogt said. one of the recovered bodies remains unidentified. authorities are not ruling out the possibility that other people not on the list could be missing.
four bodies were recovered sunday.
officials said friday that 60 people were missing; some of those later were found dead, while others notified authorities that they were safe and officials learned that still more had moved out of the area.
wegee and pipe creeks overflowed during storms that dumped 5{ inches of rain in 3{ hours. the floods destroyed as many as 70 houses and damaged up to 40 others.
most of those whose homes and belongings were swept away by the wall of water will have to put their lives back together largely without benefit of insurance.
few people in the coal-mining and steel-making area carried flood insurance, and homeowners' insurance will not cover damage from thursday's flood, residents and insurers said.
``we didn't think we needed to have flood insurance. for what? that creek never flooded. then this. everybody just got wiped out,'' said julia kulazenka.
rainwater running down hillsides had forced debris into the creeks and formed dams at bridges spanning them, shadyside fire chief mark badia said.
``eventually the bridges couldn't hold any more. the debris broke loose, and that's when we got three big gushes of water,'' badia said.
the home mrs. kulazenka shared with her husband until his death last july was damaged as wegee creek raged out of control. she said replacing a machine shop, garage, deck and automobiles she and her son owned would cost more than $80,000.
``they told us homeowners' won't do us no good. so unless the government helps us rebuild, i don't know what i'll do with this place,'' mrs. kulazenka said.
the federal emergency management agency said it will open an office tuesday in shadyside to accept applications from residents for low-interest loans and grants to help them rebuild.
before the flood, land in the wegee creek valley fetched handsome prices, said kulazenka's son, charles kulazenka. that was especially welcome to residents, many of whom were either retired or laid off from jobs in coal mines in belmont county, where unemployment in april was 6.8 percent.
``ground was at a premium down here before this because it was just outside the city limits (of shadyside). it was quiet and peaceful and people were looking to buy and build new homes out here. now, you couldn't give it away,'' kulazenka said.
``but we can't be bitter, though, because we've got our lives, and a lot of our neighbors, real close buddies, weren't that lucky.''