
forty years after sam walton first hung out his shingle, walton's 5 10 will reopen to show how a little rural storekeeper built a discount retail empire.
wal-mart stores inc.'s visitors center opens wednesday in the same building on the downtown square where walton first opened for business on may 9, 1950.
the center chronicles the rise of the nation's fastest-growing discount chain, using displays and audio-video presentations. it concentrates on how the free enterprise system works and how wal-mart thrived when similar companies didn't.
the window displays date back to the store's opening, with simplicity patterns and johnson's glo-coat, a box of dreft and some ivory snow. inside, an electronic map details the company's 1,500-plus store chain today.
also on display at the center is the hula skirt that sam walton donned for his ``dance on wall street,'' which he performed after challenging the company to reach a record 8 percent pre-tax profit in 1984. the goal was accomplished and he danced.
the old and the modern together reflect the corporate culture of the nation's biggest discount retailer behind k mart corp. of detroit.
walton and his brother, bud, opened the first wal-mart discount city in 1962. both will be on hand for the opening, along with a sprinkling of other dignitaries, including gov. bill clinton, the dedication speaker.
aside from the other displays and presentations, the center also has a replica of sam walton's original office at the store, including many fixtures he used 40 years ago.
also on display is a photograph of young sam walton, a fat-faced baby born in oklahoma in the 1920s. typical of the wal-mart outlook, dust bowl oklahoma is termed ``a place to grow and to dream'' in a video on the walton family.
after a stint with j.c. penney co. and the army, he opened a ben franklin store in newport in 1945. he lost the lease on that one, and relocated to bentonville. that's where the story took off.
sam walton convinced bob bogle, then a public health officer, to take over management of his bentonville ben franklin store in 1955.
walton ``said he wanted to put in about a dozen stores'' and needed someone to tend the shop in bentonville while he and his brother built a chain of ben franklins, bogle said in a recent interview.
that's when bogle found himself in walton's ``learn as you go'' training program.
``i got home at 10 o'clock that night after scrubbing and waxing the floor with sam,'' bogle said.
inauspicious first impressions are part of the story. in one video, david glass, who succeeded sam walton as chief executive of wal-mart in 1988, recalled his impressions after attending the opening of the second wal-mart discount city at harrison in 1964. the first store, at rogers, opened two years earlier.
``i thought to myself this is absolutely the worst discount store, or retail store, i have ever seen,'' said glass, who was president of a drugstore chain at the time.
and wal-mart vice chairman donald soderquist recalls that when walton took his idea of putting discount stores in rural areas to ben franklin headquarters in chicago, officials there ``just really didn't see a future in it.''
don shinkle, wal-mart's director of corporate and public affairs, attributed wal-mart's success to its ``associates'' _ the term for employees first coined in 1972 to stress that all wal-mart employees are partners in the company _ and to sam walton's leadership and knack for hiring the ``right person at the right time.''
at the start of 1990, wal-mart owned 1,402 stores, employed 272,000 and listed sales of $25.8 billion. sam's wholesale club closed out the year with 123 units and wal-mart announced plans to enter the california market.