
moslems blew up a truck carrying security forces wednesday, killing three soldiers in the few hours the government relaxed a curfew designed to stop the kashmiri separatist uprising, officials said.
in separate incidents, militants shot and killed a moslem they said was a police informer and a moslem died after he was caught in an exchange of fire between militants and security forces, officials said.
also wednesday, moslem snipers fired on security forces in three parts of srinagar during a five-hour relaxation of curfew, said gov. jagmohan of jammu-kashmir state. there were no casualties, he said.
the curfew was relaxed from 5 a.m. to 10 a.m. to allow people in the city of 1 million to shop for food and other essentials.
an around-the-clock curfew was imposed friday after security forces the day before shot and killed 49 moslem demonstrators marching into srinagar to take part in a pro-independence rally. at least 1 million moslems demonstrated to demand independence for the predominantly moslem state; india is predominantly hindu.
srinagar, the summer capital of jammu-kashmir, is the center of the separatist movement.
at least 171 people have been killed in kashmir since a government crackdown on the separatist movement began on jan. 20.
leading national parties decided wednesday to send a ``high-powered delegation'' to srinagar, according to the press trust of india news agency. it did not name the members, but it said they would go thursday.
the decision was taken at the end of a daylong multiparty meeting on kashmir called by prime minister v.p. singh. a joint statement after the meeting said ``despite their ideological and political differences, (the parties) were one in defending the unity and integrity of the country,'' the news agency reported.
jagmohan said the truck was driving around srinagar distributing food to troops on street corners when it was blown up by moslem militants. he gave no further details of the attack.
the attacks came amid government claims that security forces arrested at least 12 leaders of the moslem group hezbul mujahedeen. jagmohan said the militants, from srinagar and the border towns of baramulla and kupwara, have been arrested since sunday.
hezbul mujahedeen is one of 30 militant groups fighting for secession. it is believed the second most powerful independence group after the jammu-kashmir liberation front.
``we are going to hit hard at anti-national elements, there is no way they can get away with what they are doing,'' jagmohan said. ``it may take a month, six months, maybe a year, but ultimately these anti-national elments are going to be neutralized.''
jagmohan, a hindu, was appointed the state governor of jammu-kashmir on jan. 18 in an attempt by the government to control the unrest.
kashmir has been a problem for more than four decades following the 1947 partition of british colonial india into predominantly moslem pakistan and the mostly hindu india.
jammu-kashmir, then a princely state, chose to merge with india. pakistan protested, claiming the territory because of its predominantly moslem population.
the two countries have twice gone to war over the territory.
the kashmir portion of jammu-kashmir is mostly moslem, while the southern jammu segment is predominantly hindu. overall, about 65 percent of the state's 6 million people are moslem.
nationwide, moslems make up 12 percent of india's 880 million people and hindus account for 82 percent.