
pakistani troops fired on indian security forces who stopped a mob of pakistani protesters from storming across the border into disputed kashmir, officials said today.
at least three demonstrators were killed sunday night, a defense ministry spokesman said in islamabad. pakistan's state-run tv said the indian guards killed as many as six.
the trouble started after indian border guards opened fire on hundreds of pakistanis who tried to cross a cease-fire line separating pakistan-controlled kashmir from the indian-held region.
a spokesman for the indian defense ministry said pakistani troops then fired about 200 rounds from light and medium weapons at indian border posts in the uri sector.
indian forces returned fire and the exchange continued for about half an hour, the spokesman said. no one was hurt.
a pakistani official in islamabad denied the accusations.
``pakistani military authorities and the foreign secretary are in touch with indian authorities to remove the misunderstanding,'' said additional foreign secretary khalid mahmood in islamabad.
pakistan's top diplomat in new delhi, bashir babar, was summoned to india's foreign ministry on sunday and today and apprised of india's concern over the events, an indian government spokesman said.
a fluid 840-mile cease-fire line separates the indian and pakistani kashmirs. pakistan and indian twice have gone to war over kashmir, in 1948 and again in 1965.
on feb. 5, at least one person was killed and 12 wounded when pakistani mobs tried to cross the cease-fire line near jammu, 95 miles to the south.
the two demonstrations at the cease-fire line were to express support for moslem militants who are fighting for independence for the moslem-dominated state from the predominantly hindu india.
on sunday, the pakistani mob retreated when soldiers of india's paramilitary border security force opened fire, said the indian spokesman who refused to be identified.
``the mob returned a second time by which time it had become slightly dark,'' he said. ``that is when the pakistani troops opened fire.''
a pakistani spokesman, who also refused to be identified, said pakistani army patrols repulsed a mob of some 1,200 demonstrators. small groups broke away from the crowd and slipped into the indian-held territory, he said.
an official of the indian border security force, which normally patrols the border, said the indian army today took control of the cease-fire line.
some men in the intruding crowd were armed with guns which they fired occasionally, he said.
``it was becoming very difficult, our troops had to open fire,'' he said.
farouk haider, vice-president of the militant jammu-kashmir liberation front that is leading the uprising, said in islamabad after the indian firing that ``the situation is very confusing.''
thirty-one people were wounded in the shooting, haider said. five were in critical condition in a hospital in muzzafarabad, the capital of pakistan-controlled kashmir, he said, adding he knew of only one death.
the 40-year-old conflict over kashmir flared jan. 20 after a government crackdown and the arrest of 250 suspected militants. most of them were subsequently released, but the arrests sparked widespread violence.
at least 85 people have been killed since the crackdown began. most of the victims have been curfew-breaking protesters shot by security forces in srinagar.
srinagar, the summer capital of jammu-kashmir, has been the center of the secessionist movement that has turned violent in recent years.
the jammu-kashmir liberation front had earlier campaigned for union with islamic pakistan but has in recent years demanded independence and the status of a neutral country.
about 64 percent of jammu-kashmir's 6 million people are moslems, making it the only moslem majority state in predominantly hindu india's 25 states.
nationwide, moslems make up 12 percent of india's 880 million population. hindus comprise 82 percent.