
unidentified assailants hurled a grenade and fired shots today at the home of relatives of nelson mandela, killing a baby girl and injuring her parents, police said.
african national congress officials said the dead child and her parents were distant cousins of nelson mandela. they denied south african police and press reports that the child was mandela's great-granddaughter.
police said they did not know who was responsible for the attack. no group took immediate responsibility.
police lt. govindesamy mariemuthoo said the attack occurred before dawn at the home of monde mandela in the black township of soweto. the blast badly damaged part of the house, knocking holes in the wall and causing extensive damage.
the police officer said a baby girl was killed and her parents injured. he gave no other detail on the victims.
he said the room in which the injured couple had been sleeping was destroyed.
anc officials said the dead child was the great niece of mandela's father, making her a distant cousin of nelson mandela. the dead girl's father, monde mandela, runs a small grocery shop.
the anc officials said nelson mandela was close to the monde mandela family.
an anc statement said, ``the anc notes the curious coincidence of an attack on a man bearing the mandela name at this time.''
given the distant connection between mandela and the family, police said they did not know if the attack was deliberate or just a random attack linked to the general violence.
mandela was reportedly attending a political meeting in the eastern province of natal today.
soweto and other black townships around johannesburg have been hit by black factional fighting that has killed about 800 people since august. the fighting has pitted followers of the anc against zulus of the conservative inkatha group.
mandela has repeatedly accused security forces of manipulating the violence to derail government efforts to end apartheid and share power with the black majority. the police have denied mandela's charges.
mandela was released in february after 27 years in jail for opposing the white minority government. he is closely guarded by anc operatives, and there have been reports of threats on his life in recent months.
mandela and other anc leaders have been negotiating with president f.w. de klerk to pave the way for full-scale talks on ending apartheid, the south african system of racial separation. de klerk has promised to end white-minority rule.