
moslem militants killed five people who opposed their fight for independence from predominantly hindu india and kidnapped a former legislator, officials said saturday.
at least 195 people, mostly moslem demonstrators, have been killed in the northern state of jammu-kashmir since jan. 20 when the government launched a crackdown on the separatists.
state officials said four of the five people killed friday and saturday were moslems. they were identified as a deputy police superintendent; the 73-year-old local leader of the communist party of india; the grandson of another prominent communist leader; and a man accused of being a police informer.
the fifth victim was a civilian, the sources added, speaking on condition of anonymity. it was unclear if he was hindu or moslem.
the former state legislator, mir mustafa, was pulled out of his car at gunpoint saturday near his home in badgam, 12 miles west of srinagar, officials said.
srinagar has been a focal point of the fighting between government troops and separatists.
family members and highly placed sources in the government of jammu-kashmir said no group has claimed responsibility for the abduction and no demands were issued.
mustafa was an independent member of the state legislature. the governing body was dissolved in january when the federal crackdown was ordered.
in december, mustafa helped negotiate a prisoner exchange in which the kidnapped daughter of home minister mufti mohammad saeed was swapped for five prominent members of the radical jammu-kashmir liberation front.
the front is one of several moslem militant groups waging a campaign of bombings and assassinations to press demands for the independence of kashmir, a part of jammu-kashmir state. jammu-kashmir is the only moslem-majority state in india.
the secession movement has been simmering since 1947, when the state of kashmir was divided between india and moslem pakistan.
the eastern part of the state is governed by india. the western slice of kashmir is under pakistan's control.
the two countries went to war twice over kashmir, and their armies still face each other along the disputed frontier.