
pakistani and indian troops exchanged fire for several hours today after a pakistani soldier became the first military casualty on the troubled kashmir border, officers and a western observer said.
the soldier was shot in the leg sunday at a ceasefire line, several miles from the village of chaukothi, officials said on condition of anonymity.
they said there were no reports of casualties from today's firefight at the line, which divides kashmir between pakistan and india.
the nations have twice gone to war over the himalayan state, in 1948 and again in 1965. the former princely state was divided between the two nations after british colonial rule ended in 1947.
relations between the neighbors have become increasingly strained since jan. 20 when indian troops launched a military crackdown on moslem separatists in turbulent jammu-kashmir.
the militants want india's only majority moslem state to either become independent or join pakistan. jammu-kashmir is an aberration in india, where 82 percent of the country's 880 million people are hindus.
the leaders of both countries have tried to soothe tempers in the dispute and have said another war over the region is unlikely.
however, pakistani forces have now sealed off the border area at chaukothi, forbidding civilians from entering the area.
the border crossing was the scene of a bloody confrontation on feb. 11 between indian troops and pakistani students, who were marching in solidarity with activists in indian-held kashmir.
indian troops killed three students and wounded several during that confrontation, a pakistan defence ministry spokesman said. the two armies also exchanged gunfire for about 30 minutes before calm was restored.
a paksitan army captain, who said he witnessed the firefight, said unlike the occasional shootings in the past, indian soldiers appeared to be aiming at pakistani troops. the western observer said sunday's shooting of the pakistan soldier appeared to back up that assertion.
in another sign of increased tensions, pakistani and indian officers are no longer accompanying united nations' military observers as they pass through the borders.
``it is not a normal situation,'' the officer said. ``the border is extremely tense.''
pakistan officials said they were taking steps to quell what one official called ``war fever'' on the pakistan side.
``we are trying to tie the people down,'' said amir alan khan, a retired lieutenant colonel who heads kashmir's civil defence. he said hundreds of retired soldiers have approached him ``to ask for orders'' to fight the indian army.