
cement blocks were all that remained of homes, fallen branches stood where trees used to be and muddy streams meandered through the outskirts of this ohio river town after a furious flash flood.
residents donned shorts and hip-waders friday to begin putting their lives back together after 5{ inches of rain fell in 3{ hours late thursday, churning floodwaters that left at least 11 people dead and 51 others missing early today.
the shock had not worn off, said police officer bruce fink, whose bristly face bore signs of more than 20 hours on duty, including work at a temporary morgue set up at a funeral home.
``we have counselors back there now, but we've lost whole families. it's just been devastating,'' he said friday night.
fink said he feared there wouldn't be enough funeral homes to handle the dead in this eastern ohio town of 4,300 people.
allan hans called the flooding ``the devil's work.''
``i lost everything but my car and the clothes i'm wearing,'' he said.
hans said he was sitting in his trailer when he heard a branch crack and went to check out the noise. he saw rushing water, ran to tell neighbors and moved his car. the trailer was swept away by the time he returned home.
john and sue wright, whose home rests on the banks of pipe creek, estimated they lost about $20,000 worth of property.
``i was one of the lucky ones. what i lost, i can replace,'' wright said.
although it was the center of rescue operations, downtown shadyside suffered no apparent flood damage. but it was a different story on the outskirts of town, in the heart of ohio's richest coal fields.
cars were mired roof-deep in mud, and guardrails and chunks of concrete were torn from roads.
a 20-foot, 18-inch thick beam that held a sign leading to 3k's bar near pipe creek was twisted like a pretzel by the force of what witnesses described as a wall of water.
people moved rubble and made makeshift repairs to bridges that span mcmann creek, which links homes to ohio route 147. many bridges were washed away.
small tractors and four-wheel-drive vehicles were the only means of transportation in much of the stricken area.
at least 170 members of the ohio national guard were called in to patrol and to help rebuild flood-swept roads, said stacie gilg, a spokeswoman for the ohio emergency management agency.
disasters always bring out the curious, and this was no exception. by friday night, traffic jammed ohio route 7, which skirts the ohio river and is the main north-south road through town.
belmont county sheriff tom mccort said he suspected many of the vehicles belonged to sightseers.
mccort said there were no serious attempts at looting. he said he was pleased with the assistance of young people.
one young man turned in a strongbox filled with valuable coins lost in the flood, the sheriff said.
``the kid ... handed me this box and it was unlocked,'' mccort said. ``it really made me feel good.''