
iraq's powerful army invaded this small oil-rich kingdom early today. tank-led troops quickly seized the ruler's palace and government buildings, and the emir fled to saudi arabia, kuwaiti officials said.
kuwait's u.s. ambassador said the iraqis occupied all government buildings in the capital and were moving south toward the country's oil facilities. he appealed for u.s. military intervention.
a pentagon source said u.s. navy ships were diverted to the region, but president bush said the subject of intervention was not being discussed.
``the iraqis have occupied all of kuwait!'' a kuwaiti government official shouted in a telephone interview. diplomatic sources in the persian gulf estimated that more than 200 kuwaitis were killed or wounded.
the iraqi government of president saddam hussein claimed it invaded at the request of revolutionaries who had already staged a coup and established ``the provisional government of free kuwait.'' kuwait and u.n. diplomats labeled the coup report a farce.
the assault followed two weeks of tension between kuwait and iraq, caused by iraqi accusations that kuwait stole oil from a disputed border area. saddam also accused kuwait of exceeding opec production quotas, thus driving down the price of oil, a major iraqi revenue source.
the attack had wide-ranging ramifications:
_oil prices soared $3 a barrel in early trading because of fears the invasion would disrupt supplies. prices were about $2 higher later.
_president bush signed orders freezing iraqi assets in the united states and blocking most iraqi imports, including oil. oil accounts for 97 percent of iraqi imports to the united states and makes up about 3.5 percent of u.s. oil consumption. bush also froze kuwaiti assets to prevent iraq from seizing them.
_the soviet union, iraq's main arms supplier, halted weapons sales.
_the u.n. security council voted 14-0 to denounce the invasion and demanded immediate withdrawal of iraqi troops.
_a pentagon source said the aircraft carrier uss independence, escorted by a six-ship battle group, was diverted from the indian ocean toward the gulf, where other u.s. ships were already patrolling.
_secretary of state james a. baker iii planned to fly to moscow to issue a rare joint statement friday with soviet foreign minister eduard a. shevardnadze about the invasion. the plan, which was announced in washington, illustrates the dramatic improvement in relations between the superpowers, who once routinely lined up on opposite sides of most regional disputes.
kuwait's u.s. ambassador, sheik saud nasir al-sabah, told reporters in washington: ``we are desperate for any help we can get.'' he appealed specifically for american intervention.
in recent days, diplomats said iraq had massed more than 100,000 troops at the border. kuwait's entire armed forces has 20,300 soldiers.
bush said the united states would ``take whatever steps necessary'' to defend interests in the gulf. asked if this included military force, bush said: ``we're not discussing intervention.'' but he said he would not discuss military options publicly.
it was the first time in modern history an arab nation had invaded another and taken over its government.
kuwait's army was no match for iraq, battle-hardened after eight years of war with iran. iraq has emerged as the arab world's strongest and most militant military power, and saddam has a vast arsenal of chemical and conventional weapons.
diplomats said about 350 iraqi tanks wheeled into the capital a few hours after crossing the border 40 miles away at dawn. witnesses said the bombardment of ports and military airports by artillery and the air force was vicious.
the invaders surrounded the palace of kuwait's ruler, sheik jaber al-ahmed al-sabah. residents said the palace was seized after about two hours of heavy artillery barrages.
diplomats said sheik fahd al-ahmed al-sabah, one of the emir's brothers, was killed while trying to defend the palace.
there were about 50 tanks around the palace and the neighboring american embassy, residents said.
the al-sabah family has ruled the city-state for almost 250 years. the kuwaiti ambassador said the leaders were safe in saudi arabia.
operating from an unknown location, al-ahmed's government responded to the formation of the provisional government by stating: ``kuwait is kuwait to its people, let by the emir, sheik jaber, and his crown prince sheik saad. god preserve them from all harm.''
for its part, the provisional government announced through baghdad's official iraqi news agency that it was dissolving parliament and would hold ``free and honest elections'' at a future date.
the iraqi forces were led by the elite republican guard, which did the brunt of fighting in the iran-iraq war. troops set up roadblocks at major intersections and shot at cars that did not stop.
baghdad television said iraq qould withdraw its forces within days or weeks, depending on how quickly the situation stabilized.
kuwait's land and sea borders were closed, as was the airport.
diplomats said the invasion was too swift to arrange the evacuation of nationals, and foreigners were asked to keep a low profile.
there are about 4,000 americans among the large expatriate community in kuwait, where more than 60 percent of the 1.8 million residents are foreigners. u.s. officials monitoring the situation had no reports of harm to u.s. citizens in iraq, white house spokesman roman popadiuk said.
foreigners reached by telephone said they watched from their windows or dived for cover as the invasion began. ``we were totally unprepared,'' said catherine baker of illinois. ``one feels like there should have been a bit of warning.''
the british embassy was hit by shell-fire and the sheraton and hilton hotels evacuated their clientele, the diplomats said.
the invasion came hours after iraq broke off talks intended to mend its differences with kuwait.
iraqi first threatened military action against its former ally kuwait two weeks ago. washington declared its support for kuwait from the start.
during the iran-iraq war, american ships protected u.s.-flagged kuwaiti tankers from attacks in the gulf.