
soldiers from three nations locked the doors of checkpoint charlie today and a crane whisked away the cold war relic that symbolized a divided world.
a u.s. army band played a stirring song about old berlin as the rectangular white sentry station, a place east germans died trying to reach, was hoisted onto a truck for its passage into history.
the famed allied checkpoint by the berlin wall was closed with an elaborate ceremony that brought together the top diplomats from the germanys and the four world war ii allies.
``for 29 years checkpoint charlie embodied the cold war,'' u.s. secretary of state james a. baker iii told a crowd of invited guests and journalists on berlin's friedrich street.
``and now, 29 years after it was built, we meet here today to dismantle it and to bury the conflicts it created.''
baker, soviet foreign minister eduard shevardnadze and the foreign ministers from france, britain and the two germanys each heralded the end of the checkpoint as a symbol of change.
shevardnadze called for the removal of berlin's status as an allied-controlled city and the withdrawal of troops within six months after the two german states unify, which could come in december.
the proposal, as translated into english by the soviets and distributed later to news media, apparently would also include the kremlin's soldiers stationed just outside the city proper. the united states, france and great britain have an estimated 12,000 troops in west berlin.
berlin has been split into soviet, u.s., british and france sectors and west berlin remains technically separate from west germany.
the german and allied foreign ministers are meeting in east berlin to discuss the status of the city and a united germany's role in world affairs.
all borders are to be opened between the berlins and the germanys by july 2, when the nations merge their economies.
large sections of the berlin wall are being dismantled daily, and u.s. officials decided to time the removal of checkpoint charlie with the foreign ministers' meeting.
a color guard of french, british and american soldiers strode to the building and locked the doors leading to each allied nation's compartment in the checkpoint.
the giant crane then lifted the box-like building high into the air. u.s. army spokesman sgt. ed mccarthy said he believes it is destined for a museum.
checkpoint charlie stood just 20 yards from an east german checkpoint and was the only place between the berlins that could be crossed on foot by non-germans.
the ceremony was closed to the public but not to the residents of the buildings that line friedrich street, which had been divided by the berlin wall since 1961.
illa wobig leaned out her window and watched the ceremony unfold just 20 yards below the fourth-floor apartment where she has lived for 24 years.
``i saw eight people shot to death on that street,'' she said. ``i saw an east german officer try to go under a guard rail. he was shot in the neck.''
she said she also saw at least 20 successful escapes, by tunnel, car and on foot.
``i saw kennedy, reagan and carter give speeches here,'' she said. ``i saw a james bond movie filmed here. this is wonderful for history but it is sad for me. it was part of my home.''
east german construction worker andreas bratke was working near the wall in january 1986 when he suddenly bolted through the east german checkpoint, down friedrich street and through checkpoint charlie.
``i ran as fast as i could,'' he said from his home in west berlin. ``checkpoint charlie is a very important place to me.''