
jurors in the mcmartin pre-school molestation case denounced the techniques of a child therapy center and a police department letter that inflamed parents and ignited the case.
seven jurors who spoke with reporters in a joint news conference after acquitting raymond buckey and his mother, peggy mcmartin buckey, on 52 molestation charges thursday said they felt some children who testified may have been molested _ but not at the family-run mcmartin pre-school.
and they said some children may have merely repeated stories told them by their parents and interviewers at children's institute international.
the private child therapy center, which specializes in abused children, videotaped interviews with children from the mcmartin school after reports of molestations surfaced. jurors saw the tapes in which interviewers used anatomically explicit puppets and leading questions to elicit descriptions of molestation from children.
asked what led to acquittals, juror brenda williams focused on the taped interviews from the center jurors call cii.
``the cii interviews _ i could not accept them,'' mrs. williams said. ``i believe the children believe what they were saying was true. but at cii, i could not tell if the children were saying what was told to them (by interviewers) or if they were repeating what their parents had told them.
``if the cii tapes had not been entered into evidence and i had not seen them, i could have believed the children a little more,''' mrs. williams said.
``the cii tapes did not help me. they gave me a lot of reasonable doubt,'' agreed juror julie peters, 47, a supermarket meat wrapper.
``the children were never allowed to say in their own words what happened to them. all the questions were leading. they never had a chance to tell their stories,'' said juror john breese, 51, a medical technician and grandfather of five.
``i tried to believe the children,'' said juror daryl hutchins 28, an oil company lease operator. ``but if the child was so contaminated (by the interviews) i couldn't.''
equal criticism was aimed at a letter sent in 1983 by the manhattan beach police department to parents of mcmartin school children. the letter alerted parents to a claim of molestation at the school and to buckey's arrest.
``the police letter should never have been sent,'' said juror sally cordova, 27, a supermarket checker. ``it put the information out there too early. the whole city knew.''
at that point, jurors said, they felt parents had been programmed to believe their children had been molested.
``one child said his parents told him that he was molested even before he went to cii,'' mrs. williams recalled.
the panelists said they threw out entirely the most fantastic allegations, including some children's accounts of being molested in a car wash. ``we just dismissed those,'' said mrs. williams.
they said a series of medical slides shown to them lacked impact because they weren't sure what they were seeing in the photos of children's genitals.
although they acquitted defendants of most charges, the jurors deadlocked on 13 counts. some said they were unsure whether buckey was a molester but were sure the prosecution had failed to prove its molestation allegations against him beyond a reasonable doubt.
jurors said they didn't rule out that some children in the case were molested _ but not by these defendants.
``even if you accept that the children were molested,'' said juror mark bassett, ``the evidence didn't establish that they were molested at the mcmartin pre-school.''
the panelists said they were aware of the trial's enormous toll on defendants as well as children and parents.
``i think everybody is a victim,'' said ms. peters. ``i don't think anybody came out of this case a winner. i think it's sad because everybody lost something. the defendants _ their lives have been ruined. they lost their business, their reputation. it's sad.''
mrs. williams added, ``the children have to live with this. the parents have to live with this. there's nothing i can say that will make it better.''
as for themselves, the jurors said their lives were ``put on hold'' for nearly three years. bassett lost his job as a research computer scientist when his company folded. mrs. williams got married. breese said his wife died during the trial and he has since remarried.
``it's been very hard,'' said mrs. williams, a telephone company service representative. ``there were days when i thought i couldn't stand it anymore.
``i don't really know my job anymore,'' she said. ``it's going to be hard getting back into the real world.''
the jury foreman and four other jurors declined interviews.