
the soviet union said today that a united germany can join nato after a five-year transition period during which all soviet and u.s. troops would leave the country. the united states rejected the proposal, a u.s. official said.
the proposal was outlined by soviet foreign minister eduard shevardnadze during international talks in east berlin on the strategic future of a united germany.
the remarks, a copy of which were obtained by the associated press, indicates that a united germany would be free to join the western nato alliance after a five-year transitional period.
but in exchange, western and soviet troops would pull out of the country and germany's own military strength would be sharply reduced, according to the proposal.
shevardnadze made the proposal as he met with u.s. secretary of state james a. baker iii and their counterparts from britain, france and the two german states.
``i am underwhelmed,'' baker said when asked about the soviet proposal while posing for pictures with the other foreign ministers.
a u.s. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said u.s. officials objected to the five-year time limit before germany could join nato. the official said the other western ministers expressed the same reservations.
the united states wants a united germany to be a member of the north atlantic treaty organization and the soviet union has been staunchly opposed.
west germany now is a mainstay of nato and east germany is a member of the soviet-led warsaw pact.
shevardnadze said the soviet proposal seeks to limit the strength of the german armed forces and ``to revamp their structure to make sure that they are rendered incapable for offensive operations.''
it said those reductions could be undertaken over a three-year period. germany also would be prevented from producing or deploying chemmical or nuclear weapons.
it also said that within six months of unification, all western troops should leave west berlin, which remains technically under military occupation by the united states, france and britian.
the four nations would reduce their military forces in the country during a three-year period following unification first by 50 percent, then ``bring them down to a level of token contingents, or completely withdraw them from germany.''
there are about 380,000 soviet troops in east germany, while a quarter-million u.s. troops are stationed in west germany along with tens of thousands of british and french soldiers.
previously, the soviets had said their troops would stay in what is now east germany for several years, but had left unclear the exact plans for pulling them out.
shevardnadze, speaking earlier at a ceremony for the removal of the western allies' checkpoint charlie, said he wanted the big four powers' troops out of ``greater berlin'' within six months after unification.
the proposal, as translated into english by the soviets and distributed to the news media, apparently would also include the kremlin's soldiers stationed just outside the city proper.
the united states, france and great britain have an estimated 12,000 troops in west berlin. an official reached by telephone in the office of the military attache at the soviet embassy in east berlin said there were no soviet troops stationed in the city proper.