
a therapist defended her interviews of alleged victims in the mcmartin pre-school molestation trial, despite criticism by several jurors who said leading questions undermined the prosecution's case.
the jury on thursday acquitted raymond buckey and his mother, peggy mcmartin buckey, of 52 child molestation counts and deadlocked on 13 other counts.
therapist kee mcfarlane later defended her work with hundreds of mcmartin students, and suggested that the goals of therapy are at odds with the legal standards required for a successful criminal prosecution.
``what is in the interest of children is not always in the interest of the legal system,'' she said.
evidence introduced by prosecutors in what became the longest and most expensive criminal trial in u.s. history included videotaped interviews of the alleged victims.
many of the interviews were conducted at an early stage of the sexual abuse investigation by macfarlane, a social worker and director of the child sexual abuse center at children's institute international.
macfarlane said thursday she still believes children from the school had been molested and that they had not fabricated their accounts of abuse.
``this agency would never have gone all the way through what we have if we did not believe these children,'' she said.
at least seven jurors who attended a news conference agreed the evidence showed children had been molested. but the jurors were sharply critical of the interviewers' technique at the institute.
``the children were never allowed to say in their own words what happened to them,'' said juror john breese. ``all the questions were leading.''
``if the cii tapes had not been entered into evidence and i had not seen them, i could have believed the children a little more,'' juror brenda williams said.
but macfarlane said that the interviewing techniques were sound, noting that small children must be interviewed differently than adults.
``i didn't put words into their mouths,'' she said. ``i tried to enable them to get over their fears.''
macfarlane acknowledged that some procedures could have been done differently, including conducting more interviews over a longer period of time. she called the outcome of the case a ``tragic consequence of an attempt to prevent trauma to these children.''
but the institute's executive director, mary m. emmons, said some good may come out of the case.
``it has greatly increased the awareness about the issue of child sexual abuse and about the problems of prosecuting these cases,'' she said.