
maik polster was a stern-faced member of the east german secret police. patrick gainey took pictures for the u.s. army.
andreas bratke was an east german who wanted to be a west german. illa wobig saw eight people just like him die on her street.
what they all had in common was a little white shack on the west side of the berlin wall, a guardhouse with a funny name that stood as a chilling symbol of the tensions that divided a street, a city, a nation, the world.
checkpoint charlie, the famed allied border crossing on the west side of the berlin wall, was lifted into the sky by a giant crane friday, placed gently onto a flatbed truck and consigned to history.
it was emptied, locked and taken away in an elaborate ceremony attended by six foreign ministers, a brace of generals, a brass brand and hundreds of reporters.
``sir, dismiss your detachment!'' french maj. gen. francois lann barked to a young american officer, who crisply led away the last contingent of military police.
the public was not invited to the ceremony on friedrich street, the avenue blocked by checkpoint charlie and its once-feared east german counterpart nearby.
illa wobig raised six children in a fourth-floor apartment just 20 yards from checkpoint charlie. they saw it from their window for 24 years, and they saw it disappear friday.
``i saw eight people shot to death on that street,'' said mrs. wobig, 55. ``i saw an east german officer try to go under a guard rail. he was shot in the neck.''
she said she saw at least 20 successful escapes.
``some were in cars and some came through a tunnel across the street,'' she said. ``some would walk very slowly, look around and just run.''
she is not sure if one of the people she saw was andreas bratke, a 23-year-old east berlin construction worker.
tunnels, balloons, customized vehicles and other elaborate methods were used to flee past the berlin wall by desperate east germans.
bratke just ran.
``i ran as fast as i could,'' he said. ``i still cannot believe it.''
bratke is now a west berlin engineering student. he was taking his certification examinations this week.
eight months after bratke made his bold escape, sgt. patrick gainey was coming back from a party when he saw a huge commotion near checkpoint charlie.
``this guy had driven a cement truck with his girlfriend and baby through the checkpoint,'' said gainey, a u.s. army photographer. ``he drove a half-mile into the west side just to make sure. when he stopped, he asked if he was in west berlin.''
the escapee was hans-joachim pofahl, who made the crossing through a hail of bullets.
east germany's border guards were as feared as members of the secret police. according to guard maik polster, they were members of the secret police.
``i was with the state security,'' said polster, 23, as he genially waved tourists through the east german checkpoint that is expected to follow checkpoint charlie into oblivion.
``we had to maintain a certain level of appearance,'' he said. ``no smiling, no joking. we had to watch for everything.''
the stone-faced scrutiny of the east german border guards helped give checkpoint charlie its chilling cachet.
the checkpoint went up with the berlin wall in 1961.
with the wall being dismantled daily in anticipation of german unification, u.s. officials decided to remove checkpoint charlie with a grand flourish.
secretary of state james a. baker iii, soviet foreign minister eduard shevardnadze and their counterparts from france, britain and the two germanys presided over the ceremony.
while the berlin wall is coming down, temporary barricades were put up to keep the public from the ceremony. several hundred craned their necks to watch from a half-block away.
eilli wiechies, 60, watched the pageantry from his wheelchair on the sidewalk in front of his apartment house, one of the few regular people allowed on the grounds.
``finally, germans can cross,'' he said, bitter that the allied border crossing was reserved only for non-germans.
a u.s. army band played ``that is the berlin atmosphere,'' a stirring old song about the old berlin, as the white checkpoint building was lifted to within 30 feet of mrs. wobig's window.
a sign saying ``what a pity, checkpoint charlie,'' hung from her sill.
``i saw kennedy, reagan and carter give speeches here,'' she said. ``i saw a james bond movie filmed here. this is wonderful for history, but it is sad for me. it was part of my home.''