
iran is deliberately underreporting the number of casualties from thursday's massive earthquake out of fear of a political backlash, leaders of a group seeking to overthrow the country's islamic leadership say.
``the regime is very much fearful of public outrage,'' said shahin gobadi, spokesman for the people's mojahedin of iran. ``they're very much afraid of the political aftershocks.''
as gobadi spoke friday, members of the organization denounced iran's government at a noisy rally held in a park across the street from the white house.
northern iran was stuck thursday by an earthquake measuring between 7.3 and 7.7 on the richter scale. iran has told the united nations that the death toll is at least 36,000, but gobadi said his organization has received estimates closer to 100,000.
gobadi said the country cannot properly assist earthquake victims because its treasury has been spent in a war with neighboring iraq and against internal opposition.
``they have been very late in assisting the people,'' he said.
sympathy for the earthquake victims was a secondary issue for the chanting, flag-waving rally participants, who also carried signs criticizing their native country.
planning for the event began three weeks before the earthquake, but part of the friday's activities focused on iran's stricken residents.
gobadi said shoddy housing in which the government forced people to live was the cause for the widespread loss of life.
``this regime has brought them nothing but devastation and misery. this regime has devoted all of its resources to a senseless war with iraq and to oppression of the people at home,'' he said.
a u.n.-sponsored cease-fire was declared last year after eight years of the iran-iraq war.
iran's islamic republic was established in 1979 after shah mohammad reza pahlavi was deposed by ayatollah ruhollah khomeini and militants seized the u.s. embassy in tehran, taking 66 americans hostage.
the united states broke diplomatic relations with iran in april 1980. the shah died in exile in july 1980, u.s. hostages were freed six months later and khomeini died last june.
gobadi said his 25-year-old group had helped depose the shah but had no part in organizing the islamic republic.
``even in this tragedy for which we grieve we cannot trust the regime in iran,'' rep. mervyn dymally, d-calif., told an estimated 3,000 people attending the rally.
``there were many, many victims before this tragedy and there are victims now whose needs need to be addressed by the people of the united states,'' he said.
dymally, a member of the house foreign affairs committee, praised president bush's offer of humanitarian aid to iran but said bush must make sure the assistance is channeled through non-government groups.
the state department said friday that iran was willing to accept earthquake relief from the american red cross and other u.s. humanitarian organizations.