
the government today imposed direct federal rule in kashmir, where indian security forces are battling to put down a rebellion by moslem separatists.
the action follows the killing tuesday of at least 29 moslem militants by indian security forces.
in the pakistani capital of islamabad, meanwhile, india and pakistan opened negotiations today aimed at repairing relations threatened by the rebellion in the disputed northern region.
relations between pakistan and india worsened in january when indian soldiers cracked down on moslem militants in kashmir who are seeking independence from india or union with pakistan. at least 792 people have been killed in kashmir since then. india has accused pakistan of arming and training the militants, a charge pakistan has denied.
before direct federal rule was imposed today on jammu-kashmir state, it was administered temporarily by a governor, a federal representative, since jan. 18. the announcement of federal rule reflected the belief that jammu-kashmir state was too unstable to be run by an elected local government.
on tuesday, at least 29 militants were killed by indian security forces in kashmir, the moslem-dominated northern part of jammu-kashmir state and the center of the secessionist campaign.
officials, who cannot be identified under briefing rules, said 21 militants were killed in a battle with the border security force in poonch, 400 miles northwest of new delhi. hours later in the same area, troops killed eight militants who slipped across the border from pakistan, said the officials.
the guards also arrested four militants and seized 14 automatic rifles, two machine guns and two rocket launchers, the officials said.
indian officials maintain that kashmiri militants regularly cross over to pakistan through the border and return by the same route after reciving arms training. pakistan denies it is training or helping the militants, but calls the separatist struggle a fight for self-determination.
india and pakistan have fought two previous wars over kashmir, in 1948 and 1965. both were won by india.
about 65 percent of jammu-kashmir's 6 million people are moslems, making it india's only moslem majority state. nationwide, moslems make up 12 percent of india's 880 million people. hindus make up 82 percent of the population.
kashmiri separatists earlier demanded union with pakistan, an islamic country, but they have recently been fighting for total independence and the status of a neutral country.