
an iraqi airways jet carrying 78 foreigners and a number of iraqi citizens arrived today, the first commercial flight allowed out of iraq since it invaded kuwait, a japanese embassy spokesman said.
the mostly japanese tourists arrived at amman airport at 6:15 p.m. (11:15 a.m. edt) along with 34 members of an iraqi football team, said the spokesman on condition of anonymity. it was not immediately known if there were americans on board.
he said that the plane was due to leave amman for an undisclosed destination.
the spokesman said the plane was supposed to land in vienna, but it was denied landing rights.
the u.n. security council on monday voted economic sanctions that ban all trade and military ties with iraq.
jordan's information minister, ibrahim izzedine, said earlier today that the u.s. government had asked jordan to facilitate the entrance from iraq of american diplomats and their dependents. izzedine said the request was made through the u.s. embassy in amman.
thousands of westerners have been stranded in kuwait and iraq since iraq invaded kuwait on thursday. they include more than 350 who were on a british airways flight that was caught in the unrest in kuwait.
a british airways spokeswoman said today a ``substantial'' number of those passengers arrived safely in baghdad on monday. among the passengers were 28 americans, who also turned up in a baghdad hotel and appear to be fine, a u.s. official said in washington.
in addition, a kuwaiti businessman said about 1,000 people a day were fleeing kuwait through the desert to saudi arabia. the businessman, who arrived in london on a british airways flight from bahrain today, said kuwaitis and expatriates, including westerners, were joining convoys to escape the iraqi forces.
jordan's borders with iraq had been closed from the iraqi side since thursday morning, when iraq invaded kuwait. the ``provisional government of free kuwait'' set up by iraq had threatened sunday to hold hostage citizens of countries imposing sanctions on it.
a u.s. diplomat said washington had instructed ``american citizens living in or visiting iraq and kuwait to leave when circumstances permit.''