
five astronauts boarded discovery today for a second try at sending the hubble space telescope into orbit to scan the outermost reaches of the universe for clues to the beginning of time.
``astronomers are starting to tingle again in anticipation of what the hubble will be able to accomplish,'' said lennard fisk, head of nasa science activities.
air force forecasters said there was a 90 percent chance the weather would be favorable for launching the shuttle at the scheduled time of 8:31 a.m. edt.
more than a half million gallons of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen were pumped into the space ship's fuel tanks after midnight. the astronauts, wearing bright orange flight suits, climbed into the crew cabin just as dawn was breaking over the kennedy space center.
the $1.5 billion telescope, nasa's costliest cargo, will give astronomers ``a new set of eyes and ears that we don't have,'' said william lenoir, head of nasa's space flight program.
``it's going to change our perspective altogether. i can't say what we're going to learn, but i'll be astounded if we don't learn many new things.''
discovery was aiming for an altitude of 380 miles, the highest a shuttle has ever gone, so the telescope can be placed in its proper orbit far above earth's distorting atmosphere. it is the 35th shuttle mission.
columbia, which journeys into space next month with the astro observatory, sat on a launch pad 1.6 miles from discovery, only the second time both pads have been occupied; the first was in 1986 just before the challenger explosion.
hubble has been waiting to take its place in space since 1983, delayed by technical problems and the challenger accident. the latest postponement occurred april 10, when discovery's launch was scrubbed four minutes before liftoff because of a faulty power unit on the shuttle.
the mood at the kennedy space center was considerably less festive than during the first launch attempt, when hundreds of astronomers gathered with their families.
the day after launch, mission specialist steven a. hawley will use the shuttle's mechanical arm to lift the 24,250-pound telescope into space. veteran spacewalkers bruce mccandless ii and kathryn sullivan will assist if a problem develops.
discovery will follow hubble from 40 miles away for two days until after its lens cap is opened, exposing the finely polished 94.5-inch mirror to starlight.
hubble is not expected to start providing scientific data by satellite for a month or more after liftoff. however, nasa said it will release its first image _ an open star cluster in the constellation carina _ a week after launch.
in addition to the $1.5 billion cost of hubble, $500 million has been spent on spare parts, astronaut training and computer software to operate the instrument. the european space agency contributed $250 million for 15 percent of the viewing time.
nasa estimates it will cost $200 million a year to operate and maintain the telescope in space.
during its 15-year working lifetime, the telescope will provide astronomers with 10 times better resolution and 25 times more sensitivity than ground-based observatories. as a result, they will be able to study stars and galaxies so distant their light has been traveling toward earth for 14 billion years.
astronomers hope to learn whether the universe was created 15 billion years ago as believed and uncover some of the mystery surrounding galaxies, black holes and quasars. hubble also is expected to shed light on how and when the universe might end.
the telescope is named for the late astronomer edwin p. hubble, who discovered during the 1920s that the universe is expanding. his work gave rise to the big bang theory that the universe was created by a tremendous explosion.
in addition to hubble, discovery carries a human skull filled with sensors to measure the space radiation that astronauts receive. it is the skull's third trip into space.
the shuttle is to end its five-day mission with a landing at edwards air force base, calif.