
there was plenty of blame to go around at the end of the lengthy and traumatic mcmartin pre-school molestation trial, but no one was willing to accept it.
in the nation's longest and costliest trial, raymond buckey and his mother, peggy mcmartin buckey, were acquitted thursday on 52 child molestation charges. the jury deadlocked on 13 other charges.
afterward, the district attorney who filed the case criticized the current district attorney. the current district attorney blamed his predecessor and defense attorneys. and some of the parents of children who attended the school blamed everybody.
``the system is not going to protect children,'' said jackie mcgauley, a parent who believes her child had been molested but didn't testify in the case. ``life is not fair,'' said robert curry, whose son attended the mcmartin school. ``i tell my children all the time ... there is no such thing as fair.''
the district attorney who originally pursued the case said he would not have done anything differently.
robert philibosian, now in private practice, angrily dismissed accusations that he played up the mcmartin case in 1984 _ with the news media acting as eager accomplices _ to boost his public profile as he ran for district attorney.
``i was a professional prosecutor for 16 years before this case was brought,'' he said. ``to have people who know very little about professional or prosecutorial ethics, to criticize me personally that i have some political motive is totally unjustified.''
philibosian instead pointed the finger at the man who defeated him, current district attorney ira reiner. philibosian said reiner hurt prosecutor's chances by dismissing charges against five of the original seven defendants and criticizing the case in a 1986 ``60 minutes'' interview.
but reiner, calling his dismissal of charges for lack of evidence ``the decision we're proud of,'' said the trial took so long because of the state's ponderous criminal justice system, delay tactics by defense attorneys and a mess left behind by philibosian.
``this is a case i inherited,'' reiner said.
in interviews, many jurors said they believed some of the children were molested, but the prosecution never established that the defendants were responsible.
``even if you accept that the children were molested, it didn't necessarily mean they were molested at the mcmartin pre-school,'' said juror brenda williams.