
iraq says it invaded kuwait at the request of a revolutionary organization there, but diplomats dismiss that rationale as a large-scale charade.
the diplomatic world has remained largely unconviced by the flood of statements issued from iraq in the name of the provisional free kuwait government.
britain's u.n. ambassador, crispin tickell, called the iraqi action ``an invasion from the outside ... a phony coup d'etat from within.'' he said the invasion had led to ``the purported establishment of a puppet government.''
in a rare display of solidarity, the united states and the soviet union called for iraq to withdraw and imposed sanctions. the u.n. security council voted 14-0 to condemn the invasion.
but iraq's deputy permanent u.n. representative, sabah talat kadrat, said the security council should not be debating the issue, because the fall of the kuwaiti emir, sheik jaber al-ahmed al-sabah, was an internal matter.
the official kuwait news agency, monitored in nicosia, did not issue a single story all day. its computer periodically sputtered out the phrase ``line cut.''
on the other hand, state-run iraqi news agency from baghdad came alive with a series of communiques from the ``provisional government.'' the members were not identified.
the first statement said the provisional government ``finds that one of its primordial obligations is to remedy the harm done by the deposed, corrupt government to our brothers in iraq.''
iraq has been feuding with kuwait over a border dispute. it has also accused kuwait of violating its oil production quotas set by the organization of petroleum exporting countries, costing iraq of much-needed revenues because oil is cheaper when supplies are higher.
the statement on the iraqi news agency said the border dispute would be settled with ``fraternity and arab national interests,'' indicating iraq would probably take the land it wants.
the statement also said the al-sabah family, which had ruled kuwait for almost 250 years, was working in concert with zionist and colonial powers to plot against iraq.
that is the charge the iraqi press leveled at kuwait when tensions began to rise in mid-july.
``falsification of elections, authoritarianism, persecution of patriotic personalities have always been characteristics of the al-sabah family,'' the statement said.
kuwait is one of the few arab states that has experimented with a freely elected parliament. a new national council with 50 members voted into office and 25 appointed by the emir took office after june elections.
the communiques from the iraqi news agency said the national council has been disbanded.