
americans who rushed to donate money to help victims of the armenian earthquake 18 months ago are responding more slowly to last week's killer earthquake in iran. but relief agencies said they expect contributions to pick up.
``there's a hierarchy of responsiveness,'' said dick colenso, associate executive director of world concern, a private relief agency based in seattle. ``something happens in europe, there's a very large response, asia, a pretty good respons down to the middle east ... thee. when you get dynamics change.''
colenso said, however, that contributions will ``surge upward'' as news spreads of the earthquake's destruction.
``as ... you get the disaster translated into the lives of individuals instead of mass numbers, people begin to respond. they relate to that,'' he said.
at least 50,000 people were reported killed and 200,000 injured in the earthquake that struck thursday.
americares, a private agency based in new canaan, conn., brought the first shipment of supplies from the united states into iran on sunday.
the shipment was the first of its kind to be accepted by iran since the hostage crisis of 1979-80, when 52 americans were held at the u.s. embassy in tehran. iran is believede-scale structure in the universe.
awards: national award for science and technology, 1978; chinese academy of sciences award 1982; new york academy of sciences award, 1988.
political dissent: fang became politically prominent during the pro-democracy student demonstrations of 1986-87. his speeches to students at the university of science and technology in hefei in central china, where he was vice president, helped incite the protests, party hard-liners said.
fang was expelled from the communist party in 1957, when he said marxist theory on physics was obsolete. in 1987, he was fired from his hefei university posts. in between, in 1966, he was a victim of the cultural revolution purges and was sent to a communal farm for ``re-education.''
after the june 4, 1989, military crackdown on the democracy movement, fang and li obtained refuge in the u.s. embassy.