
[text] beijing, june 20 (xinhua) -- floods continue to have serious effects in guangdong, hunan and jiangxi provinces and the guangxi zhuang autonomous region in southern china.
information from the state flood control and drought relief headquarters revealed that the flood peak on the xijiang river today reached guangdong province.
by eight o'clock yesterday morning, a peak flood water level of 25.91 m [meters] was recorded at the flood monitoring station of guangxi's wuzhou city, 10.91 m above the danger level.
flood water has entered urban and suburban areas of wuzhou city, and most of its transport and telecommunications with the outside were suspended.
this city borders guangdong and lies on the xunjiang river, the name for the upper reaches of the xijiang river.
the speed of the flood-water was recorded as 46,200 cu [cubic] m per second, the most ferocious since the founding of new china in 1949.
the flood peak on the beijiang river in guangdong province passed through qingyuan city by 23:00 hours last night, and the water level was recorded as 14.72 m, about 4.22 m above the danger mark; the speed was 17,400 cu m per second.
flood control work in the pearl river (zhujiang) delta area is also very intense.
the state council, china's highest governing body, recently sent a joint working group formed by the ministries of water resources, construction and civil affairs to help fight floods in guangxi and in guangdong.
at 11 o'clock on saturday, the flood peak on the xiangjiang river passed through changsha city, capital of central china's hunan province.
the water level recorded at the local monitoring station was 38.93 m, some 3.93 m above danger level. high flood water levels were also recorded at hengyang and xiangtan cities.
about 118 towns of eight prefectures and cities along the xiangjiang river were flooded.
flood water has also entered more than 20 streets and lanes of changsha, and more than 300,000 city dwellers were affected. more than 400 factories and 5,000 shops were forced to stop production or stop business.
more than half a million armymen and local residents, under the leadership of the hunan provincial party provincial committee and provincial people's government, are going all out to fight the flood.
by 22:00 hours last night, the flood peak passed through nanchang city, provincial capital of jiangxi. statistics from the local monitoring station show that the flood water level was 25.42 m, about 2.62 m above the danger mark, and the speed of the flood was 19,100 cu m per second.
the jiangxi provincial party committee and people's government are mobilizing local people and the troops stationed there to combat the floods.
the state flood control and drought relief headquarters has sent special teams of people to help fight floods in hunan and jiangxi.
meanwhile, drought is continuing to blight most areas of northern china and northeastern china, with about 15.3 million hectares of land affected.
in the drought-stricken areas, 12 million people and 12 million head of livestock are short of drinking water, according to the state flood control and drought relief headquarters.